Page I1 DATA SHARING AND ACCESSIBILITY POLICY FOR CHANDIGARH SMART CITY LIMITED (CSCL) 

Page I2 TABLE OF CONTENTS S.NO PARTICULARS Page No. 1. Introduction 3 2. Need for the Policy 3 3. Interpretations 4 4. Benefits of Policy 5 5. Objectives and Purposes 5 6. Principles 5 7. Scope 6 8. Classification of Data 6 Sharable Data 6 Non-Sharable Data 6 9. How Datasets are Identined/categorized 7 Negative List 7 Open List 7 Restricted List 7 10. Types of Access 7 Open Access 7 Registered Access 7 Restricted. Access 8 11. Standard Operating Procedures 8 Data Collection and Publication 8 Data Quality 8 Electronic Data 9 Data Format 9 Data Security 9 Data Archiving and Retention 10 12. Technology for Sharing and Access 10 13. Price Details 10 14. Legal Framework 11 15. Implementation 11 Chief Data Officer 11 Data Contributor 12 16. Citizen Engagement and Suggestion 13 17. Smart City Data Alliance 13 18. Budgetary System 13 19. Contact Us 14 20. Conclusion 14 

Page I3 1. INTRODUCTION 1.1 The Chandigarh Smart city Limited (hereinafter referred to as "The Company") strongly supports the view that the publicly funded data or the data collected through public investment is a public good which must be made available to the public with few restrictions as may possible. However, approach to the data sharing must be responsible and must recognize legal, regulatory, ethical and commercial constraints. For this reason, the company is formulating a policy i.e. "Data Sharing and Accessibility policy for CSCL" to allowa appropriate and responsible sharing of Company's data to the public for enhancing public well-being. This policy is designed to apply to all data and information created, generated, collected and archived using public funds provided by Government of India directly or through authorized agencies by various Ministries, Departments, Organizations etc. 2. NEED FOR THE POLICY 2.1 A large quantum of data which is generated through public funds by various organizations and institutions in the country remains inaccessible to public, although most of such data may be non- sensitive in nature and can be used by public for scientific, economic and developmental purposes. Hence it is necessary to formulate a policy on data sharing and accessibility which may provide the enabling provision and platform for proactive and open access to the data generated through public funds. Formulation of said policy is also an essence in view of the statutory provision contained in Section 4(2) of Right to Information Act, 2005, which is as under:- "It shall be a constant endeavour of every public authority to take steps in accordance with the requirements ofclause (b)of sub-section (1) to provide as much information suo motu to the public at regular intervals through various means of communication, including internet, SO that the public have minimum resort to the use ofthis Act to obtain information" 

Page I4 3. INTERPRETATIONS 3.1 Data - Data means a representation of information, numerical compilations and observations, documents, facts, maps, images, charts, tables and figures, concepts in digital and/or analog form. 3.2 Data Archive - A place where machine- readable data are acquired, manipulated, documented, and distributed to others for further analysis and consumption. 3.3 Data set - A named collection of logically related features including processed data or information. 3.4 Information- Processed data 3.5 Metadata - The information that describes the data source and the time, place, and conditions under which the data were created. Metadata informs the user ofwho, when, what, where, why and how data were generated. Metadata allows the data to be traced to a known origin and know quality. 3.6 Negative List- It includes non-sharable data as declared by the Company. 3.7 Non-Shareable Data - The dataset which is highly confidential and sensitive in nature is known as non-sharable data 3.8 Open Data - A dataset is said to be open if anyone is free to use, reuse, and redistribute it. 3.9 Open List- It includes sharable and non- sensitive data having open access without any registration or authorization. 3.10 Restricted Data- Data which are accessible only through a prescribed process of registration and authorization by the Company. 3.11 Sensitive Data- Sensitive data as defined in various acts and rules of the Government of India. 3.12 Sharable Data- Those data not covered under the scope of negative list and non-sensitive in nature 

Page 15 4. BENEFITS OF POLICY 4.1 Easy access to government owned data will enable more extensive use of a valuable public resource for the benefit of the community. By adopting common standards for the collection and transfer of data, integration ofi individual data sets may be feasible. By sharing data, the need for separate bodies to collect the same data will be avoided resulting in significant cost savings in data collection. Ready access to existing valuable data is essential for many decision-making tasks such as protecting the environment, development planning, managing assets, improving living conditions, national security and controlling disasters. 5. OBJECTIVES AND PURPOSES 5.1 This Policy is designed to apply to all such sharable data available with the Company either in digital or analog forms. The objective of this Policy is to facilitate access to Company's owned sharable data and information in both human readable and machine readable forms through a wide area network all over the country in a periodically updatable manner, within the framework of various related policies, acts and rules of Government of India, thereby permitting a wider accessibility and use of public data and information. 6. PRINCIPLES 6.1 The principles on which data sharing and accessibility need to be based include openness, flexibility, transparency, legal conformity, protection of intellectual property, formal responsibility, professionalism, standards, interoperability, quality, security, efficiency, accountability, : sustainability and privacy. 

Page 16 7. SCOPE 7.1 This Policy is completely drafted in compliance of notification of NDSAP, which mandates government departments to share non- enstve/mon.conidenta data in an open format. The Company in its day to day functioning collects and generates large amount of such non-sensitive/non-confidential data, which generally remains inaccessible to the public. Such data need to be available in an open format, meaning thereby, it should be free from any license, registration or any other mechanism of control. Data in such an open format would certainly enhance transparency and accountability while encouraging public engagement. 7.2 The Company undertakes to organize workshops and other training programmes that would engage the stakeholders and researchers (eg. Academia, students, research institutes, startups etc.) to understand the processes involved in Contribution, approval, identification, and assessing data needs. Such events and programmes SO conducted by the Company will enhance the intentions among the stakeholders and researchers to promote a technology-based culture of data management and it will also led to positive citizen outcomes. The training SO imparted by the Company will certainly help to engage stakeholders to solve the major urban challenges by assessing the data need. 8. CLASSIFICATION OF DATA Different types of data sets generated in any form by the Company can be classified as sharable data and non-sharable data. 8.1 Sharable Data The data sets which are non-confidential and non-sensitive in nature are known as sharable data. Such data should be accessible in an open format. 8.2 Non-Sharable Data The data sets which are highly confidential and sensitive in nature are known as non-sharable data. Such data can be accessed only 

Page 17 after following a prescribed process of registration and authorization. 9. HOW DATA SETS ARE IDENTIFIED/CATEGORIZED The company shall identify data sets by the following categories: - 9.1 Negative List The datasets which are confidential in nature and are in the interest of nation's security shall not be open to public and for such category of data the Company should prepare its Negative List which shall include the non-shareable and highly confidential data. 9.2 Open List All other datasets which do not fall under the category of negative list would be covered in the Open List that includes the data which are sharable and non-sensitive in nature and accessibility of such data should be in an open format. 9.3 Restricted List Datasets which are declared restricted by the Government of India, or by any statute/act or by any policy/notification issued by government, would be covered under the Restricted List. Accessibility to such data is generally restricted but can be permissible by following the prescribed process of authorization. 10. TYPES OF ACCESS 10.1 Open Access Datasets which are sharable and non-sensitive in nature and which are included in the open list are easily available through open access without any process of registration and authorization. 10.2 Registered Access Datasets which are non-sharable and Confidential in nature and which are included in negative list are accessible only through a prescribed process of registration/authorization. This process is to ensure that the Company can track the users and the use of data. 

Page I 8 The users are required to register their names through the web portal and then download the information by using the user name and password provided to them at the time of registration. 10.3 Restricted Access Datasets which are declared restricted by the Government of India, or by any statute/act or by any policy/notification issued by government, are accessible only through and under authorization. 11. STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES 11.1 Data Collection & Publication-Colection of datasets needs to be done by logging into the web-portal to be maintained by the Company. Resources (Datasets) are to be contributed by various departments in a predefined workflow i.e. after taking approval from the concerned Authority. Data Contributors nominated by the Company or the departments are authorized to publish datasets in an open format on the web-portal of the Company. It is for the Company to identify and prioritize the release of datasets and categorize the type of access granted for them and publish as many high value datasets as possible. Each department shall have its own criterion of high value and low value datasets. However High value Data is governed by the following principles which shall be taken care ofby the departments while publishing them. Completeness Primary Timeliness Ease of Physical and Electronic Access Machine Readability Non-discrimination Licensing Permanence 11.2 Data Quality-Chandigarh Smart City Limited ensures that the quality standards of datasets are completely met with. The departments are authorized to publish the data in an open format. However, the data must be absolute, accurate and machine readable. Hand written notes should not be published as it would be difficult for machines to process, similarly data in non-Unicode 

Page 19 formats should be avoided and only electronic data be given priority. Further datasets should be free from any sort of legal issues and same should not compromise with National Security. 11.3 Electronic Data-Datasets released by several departments should be accessible with ease, either through physical or through electronic means. Physical Means include requirements to visit in a particular office in person or requirements to comply with particular procedure (such as completing forms or submitting requests and representations etc.) Automated Electronic means include datasets accessible only via submitted forms or systems that require browser-oriented technologies (e.g. Flash, Javascript or java applets, mail etc.) 11.4 Data Format- NDSAP recommends that datasets has to be published in an open format. It should be machine readable. Considering the current analysis of data formats prevalent in Government, it is proposed that data should be published in any of the following formats: CSV (Comma separated values) XLS (Spread sheet Excel) ODS (Open Document Formats for Spreadsheets) XML (Extensive Markup Language) KML (Keyhole Markup Language used for Maps) GML (Geography Markup Language) 11.5 Data Security-Chandigarh Smart City Limited by way of this Policy encompasses the systems and processes that ensures not only the integrity but also the security of datasets published by various contributors or departments. The datasets which are highly confidential and sensitive in nature and involves the question of national security and privacy of an individual must be certainly secured and access to such datasets should be restricted as a general principle and if made permissible that should only be through a prescribed process of registration or authorization. 

Page 10 11.6 Data Archiving & Retention- Data Archive refers to a place where machine-readable data are acquired, manipulated, documented, and distributed to others for further analysis and consumption. It must be ensured that every dataset contains archiving information. Datasets published over open data portal will be retained as per Retention Policy of government (if any). Priority should be given to data whose utility is time sensitive and such data shall be surely retained. 12. TECHNOLOGY FOR SHARING AND ACCESS 12.1 This Policy is to support the Government of India in its commitment to transparency and efficiency in governance. Therefore, the data is to be made available through a web-based portal that is clear and simple for everybody to use. The shared data should be accessible to all users irrespective of device in use, technology or ability. The main aim behind web-portal would be to provide maximum accessibility and usability to its visitors. 12.2 The data repository will hold current and previous data. The data is to be updated periodically from time to time. Online analytical processing of data will be available on the web portal. The main features of the web portal will include: Secure Web Access Searched based Report Dynamic report in exportable format Complete Metadata Bulletin Board 13. PRICE DETAILS 13.1 Pricing of the data, if any, would be decided by the Company as per the motincation/mstruction issued in this behalfby the Government. Hard copies of certain documents should be available on request. However, the Company may decide the charges to be paid for these services as per Government guidelines/policy. 

Page 11 14. LEGAL FRAMEWORK 14.1 Data will remain the property of the Company and will reside in its IT enabled facility for sharing and providing access. Access to data under this Policy shall not be in violation ofany acts and rules ofthe Government ofIndia in force. Legal framework ofthis Policy will be aligned with various acts and rules covering the data. 15. IMPLEMENTATION 15.1 In order to implement open data, CSCL undertakes the following activities: Nominate Chief Data Officer Nominate Data Contributors Identify Datasets Publish Datasets on Web-Portal Prepare Negative List Create Action Plan for regular release of datasets Monitor and Manage the Open Data Programme of the Department. 15.2 Chief Data Officer The Additional Chief Executive Officer of CSCL, shall be nominated as the Chief Data Officer or Nodal Officer for the Department/ Organization/ State. The responsibility of Chief Data Officer is as follows: Lead the open data initiative of department. Nominate Data Contributors. Take initiative of department. Identify the High value Datasets and schedule their release on OGD platform. Prepare the Negative list for the Department as per the directions in NDSAP. Ensure that the datasets being published are in compliance with NDSAP through a predefined workflow process. Periodically monitor the release ofdatasets as per predefined schedule. 

Page 12 Take relevant action on the feedback/suggestion received from the citizen for the datasets belonging to the Ministry/Department/Organization. Take action on suggestions or new datasets made by public on OGD platform. 15.3 Data Contributor In order to cater to the contribution of the datasets from ofhices/organization under the Minstries/Departments the Chief Data Officer can nominate a number of Data contributors who would be responsible in contributing the datasets along with their metadata. The contributed datasets would be approved by the Chief Data Officer as the case may be. The responsibility of Data Contributor is as follows: Aggregate the data demand from various channels. Collecting the High value Data sets and to publish them on OGD Platform. Sensitizing the department employees over the importance of data quality etc. 15.4 This policy once implemented would lead to: Opening up oftheinformation out oft the Government'System. Making available of the Accurate, Reliable and Unbiased information. Establishment of a platform to promote innovation in government applications. Enhancing government Transparency, Accountability and Public Engagement. Effective utilization of Government data by providing meaningful visual representations. Enabling development of Innovative Applications around datasets or mash-up from multiple datasets hence giving different perspectives to government data. 

Page 13 16. CITIZEN ENGAGEMENT AND SUGGESTION 16.1 The Open data Platform shall also have a strong component of Citizen Engagement. Citizens can express their views and suggestions and as well rate the datasets published by the department. Datasets can be rated by public on three principal aspects i.e. Quality, Accessibility and Usability. The users can also embed the resources/datasets in their blogs or websites. Facility to contact the concerned authority shall also be available on the Platform. 17. SMART CITY DATA ALLIANCE 17.1 The Policy not only supports the idea of sharing and accessibility of data to the public, but it also promotes the idea for creation of an alliance or association which will provide a collaborative framework to solve critical city problems through use of data. The alliance will undertake education and awareness about data in the community, understand and address concerns on data privacy and security. It shall further aim to create data collaborations between various government and private agencies for solving various problems relating to data sharing and continuously evolve the culture of data sharing in the city. 18. BUDGETARY SYSTEM 18.1 The implementation ofthis Policy is expected to entail expenditure for both the Company as data owner and for data managers also for managing data refinement, data storage, data security, data quality and data upgradation etc. Therefore, budgetary provisions and appropriate support for data management to the Company by Government of India would be necessary. It is for the Government to design and position a suitable budgetary incentive system for the data owner for enhancing and encouraging open access to the sharable data. 

Page 14 19. CONTACT US 19.1 We seek from the users to inform the company of any analysis or publications resulting from their work with the data set. This will help us to maintain and overview ofhow data is being used. We are very interested to learn of any secondary analysis of our data and about forthcoming publications that may arise from work with our data. Please contact us: - If you would like to be kept informed of future data workshops. For any further information about our data or our methodology. Ifyou would like to have access to more data 20. CONCLUSION 20.1 The policy provides for the facility of optimum accessibility and usability of data by the users and further encourages the proper organization of data, with better access services. Data Sharing and Accessibility Policy aims at the promotion of a technology - based culture of data management as well as data sharing and access. It is necessary to open up the information on the available data which can be shared with civil society for developmental purposes. 

