CHANDIGARH ADMINISTRATION. NOTIFICATION No 3288 Dated, Chandigarh the: 4-12-2420 The Administrator, Union Territory, Chandigarh is pleased to notifs Parking Policy for Chandigarh, which will be applicable to the entire Union Territory of Chandigarh (except abadi areas of villages), in view of the directions of the Ho'nble Punjab and Haryana High Court, Chandigarh dated 24.01.2020 in CWP-PIL No. 78 of 2019 to curb the parking problems within the city and to reduce the traffic congestion. The general public can access the said notification on the official website of Chandigarh Administration at the address dhasdahemihdmsuwnaahmin kJ Arun Kumar Gupta, IAS Principal Secretary Home-cum- Chief Administrator, (On behalf of H.G., the Administrator), Union Territory, Chandigarh. 

CHANDIGARH ADMINISTRATION PARKING POLICY 1. Background: Union Territory, Chandigarh, has population of 10.54 lakh as per census conducted in the year 2011. The city is the capital of the States of Haryana and Punjab. The towns of Panchkula (population 2.11 lakh in 2011) in Haryana and Mohali (population 1.76 lakh in 2011) in Punjab are very close and constitute part of Chandigarh Urban Complex. Besides, Zirakpur and Kharar in Punjab are also coming up in the vicinity and are almost part of this agglomeration now. Thus, making Chandigarh Urban Complex practically a larger urban area. Chandigarh is a premier center for education, medical institutes and emerging fast as a major IT/ITES hub in North India. The city is having one of the highest per capita income in India. The high growth and improvement in living standards has led to remarkable increase in the number of registered motorized vehicles and their resultant increased use in the absence of adequate and quality public transport system in Chandigarh. It is a well-known fact that the city is getting clogged with increasing number of private vehicles every year. As per 2015, statistics of the Administration more than 10 lakhs vehicles are present in the city; out of which 35% are cars and remaining is wo-wheeler. The problem of parking is acute in the city especially in the high density commercialresidential areas. Most of the neighborhood shopping centers in the city have now turned into specialized markets. For example Sector-22 has developed a Jewellers Market; Sector-11 and 16 have Chemists & Medical equipment's market due to proximity to the major hospitals and Sector-18 & 19 have become popular for electrical market & kitchen appliances etc. These neighbourhood markets are attracting city level traffic, which leads to acute problem of parking. In residential areas, particularly for Marla row housing and LIG/EWS housing, many people are parking their vehicles on the street and using the setback portion for gardening and plantation works etc., whereas cars are encroaching the right of way of pedestrians and public spaces. Hon'ble Punjab and Haryana High Court in CWP-PIL No. 78 of 2019 and connected matters directed that the Chandigarh Administration should finalize the Parking Policy within a period of 90 days. Therefore, in compliance to the directions passed by Hon'ble High Court, the present Parking policy is being notified to reduce & resolve the chaotic parking situation in all areas of the city including residential, commercial, institutional, industrial etc. The guidelines primarily focus on strict enforcement to prevent misuse of limited resources, reclaim the right of way of pedestrians and restrict parking of vehicles on invaluable greens of the city. 2. Introduction Land is valuable in all urban areas. Parking places occupy large portions of such land. This fact will be recognized in determining the principles for allocation of parking space. Parking is an essential component of the transportation system. A typical vehicle run for one hour on an average and is parked for 23 hours in a day. It is also important to consider that a typical vehicle usually need three different parking spaces-one at the owner's residence, second at owner's office/business place and third at recreatonalentetahment facilities. 1 

2.1 Approach to the Parking policy Traffic management and parking policy are closely interlinked and will serve a wider set of environmental, social and economic objectives. The city needs to give high priority to parking control initiatives, which encourage a shift from the use of personal modes of travel, especially the 2-wheeler and cars, to public transport, walking or cycling; and to traffic management program, which reduce accidents, congestion, pollution and dependency on personal modes of transportation. Rather than having a reactive parking policy, the Administration intends to have a dynamic parking policy which constantly change with the ever-increasing number of vehicles. The guidelines will itself lead to a reduction in the need for parking and support more strategic planning objectives. The lack of available parking and the price one has to pay for it are powerful incentives for people to consider alternative modes of transport. Transport choices can be influenced strongly by restrictions on convenient parking at the journey's end. Parking spaces (on-street and off-street) have to be selected sO as to have least impact on the flow of traffic. In such cases, parking shall not be available at all locations and people must have to finish their journey on foot or by other modes of transport. In a city where a large share of trips are to be handled ideally by the public transport system, the intermediate modes of transport (auto rickshaws, taxis etc.) becomes important to fill gaps left by the public transport grid. If no space has been allocated for these vehicles, they shall be parked or wait for rides on the roads and create major obstruction to traffic. Therefore, valuable parking spaces will be set aside for their use, especially at interchange locations, like at bus terminals (both private and public), railway stations and at commercial centers. At the same time, a separate study for demand management need to be done to reduce the need for parking over a period of time. The land use recommendations of notified Chandigarh Master Plan 2031 are also enlisted at Pt9 of Annexure. 2.2 Aims of the Guidelines:- 1. Encouraging use of alternative modes of transport and reduce motor vehicle use (thereby reducing traffic congestion, accidents and pollution). 2. Ability to accommodate new traffic management concept and respond to traffic problems. 3. Appropriate use of land with promotion of environment friendly measures. 2.3 Citizens' cooperation and participation: People's cooperation is essential to install a sense of discipline to obey traffic and parking regulations. The creation of parking infrastructure require not only funds and technology but also cooperation of the vehicle owners. Indiscriminate parking in front of business and personal places in violation of parking norms shall defeat this effort. This is a difficult aspect but it can be achieved by involving market associations, resident's welfare associations and interest groups who are keen to make the city a good place to live in. New concepts like car free day, congestion taxes, vehicle free zones etc. need to be promoted by such interest groups. Public education, awareness campaigns and public participation programme shall play an important role in giving this policy a wide acceptance. 2 

2.4 National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP), MoUD The National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP), 2006, which has been later revised and reorganized in 2014. Following paragraph explains NUTP's approach towards parking management: The National Urban Transport Policy recognizes that in a developing economy, ownership of personal vehicles will continue to increase for the next few years. Hence, the Policy does not discourage the ownership of such vehicles but only seeks to discourage daily usage. It recommends interventions that would encourage people to use public transport for their daily commute to work and for education, but for periodic recreational trips with their families; they could use personal motor vehicles. Limiting the availability of parking space and the levy of a high parking fee must be used as a means to curb the use of personal motor vehicles. Preference in the allocation of parking space for public transport vehicles and non-motorized modes as well as easier access of work places to and from such spaces would go a long way in encouraging the use of sustainable transport systems. Park and ride facilities for bicycle users, with convenient inter-change, would be another useful measure. Simultaneously, a graded scale of parking fee, that recovers the economic cost of the land used in such parking, will be adopted. The objective would be to persuade people to use public transport to reach city centers and restrict the access of personal motor vehicles to such city centers. 2.5 Key elements and Guiding Principles: A) The key elements of parking supply include: 1. The number of parking places by type (i.e.on-and off-street parking); 2 The location of parking places by type (e.g. out-of-town Park and Ride facilities etc.); Parking supply is of course mediated depending on who owns and controls it. On-street parking is almost totally owned and mostly controlled by local authorities; off-street parking will be owned and or controlled by either the local authorities or private operator. B) Key guiding principles basically consist of: 1 Parking requirements, i.e. the numbers of parking spaçes that must be supplied at a particular location, which is often mandated in zoning codes or development requirements based on, published standards. 2 Parking regulations, which typically include free parking, time restrictions, users' restrictions (e.g. parking only for residents, or disabled, or public transport passengers etc.) and pricing parking. 3 Marketing, i.e. trying to persuade car users to use specific parking locations, such as campaigns to use Park & Ride facilities, or specific payment methods such as paying by mobile phones etc. 4 Information and Communication, such as (dynamic) route guidance to (available) parking places, either at the road side (information) or via IT system (communication). "Parking regulations are defined as "regulations that control who, when, and how long vehicles will park at a particular location in order to prioritize parking facility use". They typically include time restrictions, users' restrictions e.g. parking only for residents or for disabled = and pricing of parking. The latter is probably the most powerful and, from a political point of view, controversial tool of parking policy". 3 

3. PROPOSALS: 3.1 Parking Regulations:- 1. Staff buses to be plied by all GovernmentPSU Organizations' Industriall IT companies with more than 50 employees. Shuttle service will be started by various institutions (i.e. IT Park, Industrial Area, Hospitals, Public Offices e.g. Chandigarh Administration etc. to discourage use of personal vehicles). 2. Differential timings for schools/offices among PunjablHaryanauT especially those of Chandigarh Administration will be adopted to reduce the demand for parking. 3. For commercial areas the Market Welfare Associations (MWA) will be actively involved for the parking management Registered members of Resident Welfare Association (RWA) society will actively enforce all parking laws including pedestrian/cyclists' right of way instead of parking cars on footpaths. 4. Parking on footpaths will be strictly prohibited and civic agencies / Police will toe such illegally parked vehicles. 5. A lane should be earmarked for unhindered movement of - vehicles Ambulance, Fire Tenders, Police vehicle etc. in emergency all streets from V1 to V5. Similarly emergency lane shall be marked in all commercial areas as recommended by the Chief Fire Officer. 6. To achieve safe turning for Emergency vehicles/Fire Trucks in residential areas, parking of vehicles up-to 50 meter will not be allowed on all approaches near all type of inter-sections. For this, 'No Parking' zones will be clearly demarcated with signage's at all such inter-sections. 7. In area, where adequate parking space is not available, on-street parking on payment basis must be introduced at reasonable safe distance for footpathicyclists and design of one street parking as per UTTIPEC (Unified Traffic and Transport Infrastructure Planning Engineering Centre Guidelines) and IRC:SP:12:2015. The design shall be such as to minimize conflict between parking, walking and cycling. Pick up and drop facility will be prioritized over parking facilities. However, on-street must be utilized for the general convenience of users in the following space orders of priority:- I. Pedestians/Cyeists. I. Mass Public Transit (buses) and related multi-modal integration facilities. III. Emergency Vehicles. IV. Differently- abled access parking facilities. V. Para transit pick ups & drop. VI. Hawker/vendor. zone with seating/resting areas. VII. Personal motor vehicle to be parked within the building premises. VIII. Priced short-duration on-street parking. IX. Overnight parking for Transport Vehicles. 8. Community parking for night in each sub sector shall be created by using neighborhood commercial and institutional parking lots. These facilities to be managed and run as per the guidelines formulated by MC, Chandigarh in association with RWAS. 9. Provision of two gates in plotted development in residential areas shall be strictly adhered to provide for maximum parking within plotted premises. 4 

The encroachments by vendors must be removed and shifted to their 10. sO as to free the designated locations by enforcement authority pedestrian areas, parking spaces and other such areas. lane with physical barrier (i.e. plastic traffic 11. Separate segregated for queuing of vehicles shall be provided at entry point of barrier/bollards) public parking lot ensuring that waiting vehicles do not cause any hindrance to smooth traffic movement on the road as well as pedestrian movement at the roadside. 12. Green areas shall not be converted or used for parking as it has adverse impact on environment and public health especially for children and parking structure will not be constructed in green area and neighborhoods parks as provided in the CMP-2031. 13. Gardeningplantation blocking pedestrianlcyclists' on right of way will not be allowed on all kinds of roads especially V-4, V-5 and V-6 roads. 14. Functions, melas or gatherings within the sectorial grid of Chandigarh and Industrial areas attract huge number of cars. Hence, organizers'industrial owner will arrange shuttle service from prominent locations and the same will be widely published in local newspapers well in time and shall be part of the booking permission granted by the concerned authority. 15. Adequate dedicated cycle parking/ E-Vehicle parking near markets, retail commercial areas, work spaces, community centers etc. must be provided. It is a crucial component to support the existing and the upcoming cycle infasrnucturelEvehicles in the city. 16. Institutions will follow parking norms and provide requisite number of parking spaces. All Institutions must be advised to ensure that vehicles belonging to their institution staff as well as visitors are parked within the campus. 17. Adequate parking as per norms must be provided within all the plot boundaries to avoid spillage on road. 18. In line with the National Building Code of India 2016, parking for differently abled to be provided in all parking spaces. A minimum of 6 accessible parking spaces in the first 200 parking spaces and 1 for each additional 100 parking spaces to be demarcated for physically disabled users. The space allocation in small and medium cities will be done in the same ratio, depending on the number of available parking bays. These spaces shall be free of charge and designed according to the "Harmonized Guidelines and Space Standards for Barrier Free Built Environment for Persons with Disability and Elderly Persons, 2016", Government of India. In case of violation and utilisation of earmarked spaces by other users, a fine must be levied in accordance with Section 177 of MV Act, 1988. Such facilities shall be free of parking charges and which will not be used by anyone other than identified persons. ID cards shall be distributed by social welfare to such persons on demand. 19. In all "No Parking" zones, only boarding-alighting shall be permitted (less time in congested areas and more time in less used parking). Halting of vehicle for more than 5 minutes in 'No Parking' zone with driver sitting in the vehicle shall not be permitted and shall be treated as violation of 'No Parking' regulation. Stopping the vehicles at bus stops and on turnings, even for boarding-alighting purposes shall not be permitted. 20. Parking zones and spaces must be clearly defined and the ground through appropriate signages for information demarcated of on public and for ease of enforcement. Concept of the general custody charges (apart 5 

from towing charge) to be paid by the owners of seized vehicles may be introduced in UT Chandigarh. 21. Traffic penalty under relevant laws and statues shall be strictly enforced and adhered to. 3.2 Infrastructure Inventory:- 3.2.1 Off street parking spaces to be designed to comply with design standards, including dimensional and circulation requirements as per global norms / standards adopted by MC. 3.2.2 Multi-level parking structures will be developed to accommodate the existing demand for parking. Design competitions will be held by the Municipal Corporation for having innovative designs with latest technologies/trends to optimally utilize the land for parking. Multilevel parking shall have proper access road and separate entry and exit ramps for movement of vehicle to all floors. 3.2.3 Adequate provision for bicycle parking will be made in public parking lots on ground floor. A proportion of two-wheeler parking equivalent to the mode share of bicycles will be reserved in all building plans for bicycles. 3.2.4 The proposal for provision of public parking areas, if feasible at the entry of the city for tourists coming from surrounding cities/states will be explored. Such parking areas will be connected via Public transport system to various popular destinations of the city. 3.2.5 Dedicated Bus Corridor may be experimented on heavy traffic roads connecting Panchkula, Mohali, Zirakpur etc. 3.2.6 The Chandigarh Administration has allowed amendment in the Chandigarh Building Rules (Urban)-2017 for provision of basement beyond the zoned area up to three level in all plots i.e. Residential Group Housing, Commercial Industrial, institutional buildings etc. having area four kanal and above except residential (Marla and Kanal Houses). This will be encouraged to accommodate more parking within the site. 3.3 Parking Demand Management: 3.3.1 Long term plan for seamless, reliable, coordinated public transport system for the entire Chandigarh Urban Complex must be implemented in phases, which will include option of first & last mile connectivity. 3.3.2 Bus movements pattern/rationalizing bus timings/dedicated bus corridors/ routes to be optimized by Transport Department. 3.3.3 Taking into consideration, the grid system of Chandigarh, reliable and regular services of buses and more frequency will be ensured by Transport Department. 3.3.4 Motorists particularly Traders & Merchants' office staff, institutional staff to be encouraged to use carpooling etc. to maximize parking available for customers. spaces 3.3.5 The residents of Chandigarh must be encouraged to use bicycles. 3.3.6 All the colleges and universities located inside city will also be advised to discourage use of four wheeler among students either by increasing the user fees of the vehicles or by banning them completely. The hostels must also do the same and provide for shared mobility. 3.3.7 Incentives for public transport & disincentives for private vehicles be introduced. 3.3.8 For Sector-wise solutions, RWA/MC Officers must be involved for parking management 6 

3.3.9 IEC (Information & Communication) activities / campaigns shall be conducted regularly by the Transport Department and the Chandigarh Police in close coordination with Non Government Organisations / Resident Welfare Associations to encourage walking and cycling. 3.4 Technology Interventions:- Parking Management System that incorporates appropriate technology must be evolved to achieve the following objectives: 3.4.1 Be able to assess parking demand and able to convey availability of parking lots in a particular area. 3.4.2 To optimize the route management of CTU buses. 3.4.3 Reduce parking violations with the help of parking meters and other smart technologies, 3.4.4 Enable payments of parking fee / fine through mobile, e-wallet, debit/credit card, net banking etç., 3.4.5 To manage differential rates / congestion pricing in parking fee. 3.4.6 Suitable application will be developed for the city, which will provide citizen with travel advice on Non Motorised Transport and Public Transport which can be integrated with Public Bike Sharing in Chandigarh. 3.5 Parking Pricing: 3.5.1 To be decided by Transport Department Municipal corporation. 3.5.2 The Chandigarh Municipal Corporation shall decide on priority for introduction of peak / non peak hour congestion pricing in all high density parking demand areas including commercial, institutional, residential and public / semi public areas., The parking byelaws / regulations prescribed for different typology of buildings under the Parking Policy are given as Annexures. 7 

ANNEXURES Parking Norms in Residential areas as per "Notified Chandigarh Building Rules (Urban)-2017": 1. Parking norms in Residential (plotted) as follows:- Below 10 marla = 1 ECS From 10 marla to below 1 kanal = 2E ECS From 1 kanal to below 2 kanal = 3E ECS 2 kanal and above - ECS Note:- The construction of front boundary wall is optional. > To facilitate parking and movement of vehicles, two main gates shall be permitted along-accessible road in the front boundary wall of the residential buildings. > Stilt parking at ground floor shall be allowed within the permissible ground coverage, FAR and height of thel building. 2. Parking norms in Group Housing is as follows: 1. 1.5 ECS per DU with unit area upto 111.48 Sq.m 2. 2.0 ECS per DU with unit area upto 278.70 Sq.m 3. 3.0 ECS per DU with unit area above 278.70 Sq.m 4. 10% guest parking shall also be provided on surface for visitors. Parking requirements are also known as parking standards or parking norms. For Chandigarh, the parking norms have already defined in CBRCU-17 for various types of buildings, given as under: Commercial (Governed by individual zoning) 1. Hotel - 2 ECS per 100 sq.m. of built up area. Minimum 80% of the parking will be proposed underground to keep more open/green area on surface. 2 Multiplex / Malls - 3 ECS per 100 sq.m. of the covered area in respect of multiplex or cinema component + 30% of the total covered area of that componenti i.e. Multiplex or cinema and 2 ECS per 100 sq.m. of the balance total commercial covered area including circulation area. Minimum 80% of the parking must be proposed underground to keep more open / green area on surface. 3 Commercial (converted from industrial)- 2 kanal upto 1 acre - 2 ECS per 100 sq.m. built up area Above 1 acre = 3 ECS per 100 sq.m. built up area (Minimum 15 % of total parking to be provided at surface level). 4. Banquet -. gross area and further on pro rata basis. 5 Bulk Building Material - 1 ECS per 100 sq.m. of the covered area. 6 Timber site - as per architectural control sheet. 7. Theatre converted into multiplex - 3 ECS per 100 sq.m. of the covered area in respect of multiplex or cinema component + 30% of the total covered area of that component ie. multiplex or cinema and 2 ECS per 100 sq.m. of the balance total commercial covered area including circulation area. & Minimum 80% of the parking must be proposed underground to keep more open / green area on surface. 8 

3. Public / Semi Public buildings 1. Hospital & Dispensary - 1 ECS for 5 beds(private) 1 ECS for 10 beds (public) 1 ECS for 100 sq.m. for remaining area 2. Police Station, Fire Station, Community Centre I Janj Ghar, Sports Stadium - For other buildings, 20% of the area of site. 4. Cultural & non Academic Institutional &Religious 1. Cultural & nonacademic institutional sites - 2 ECS per 100 sq.m. 2. Religious = 20% of the total plotarea 5. Educational Institutes 1. Education City (Sarangpur) - 2 ECS per 100sq.m. 2. Educational / academic - 20% of total plot area + 2 ECS per 100 sq.m. or fraction of administrative officearea. 3. Hostel - 1.8 ECS per 100 sq.m. of built uparea. 6. ITI Park 1. Main campus (6 acre and above), small campus (2 to 6 acres), Built to suite sites - 2 ECS per 100 sq.m. of covered area. Minimum 80% of parking must be proposed in basement. 7. IT Habitat 1. Hospital = 1 ECS for 05 beds (private), 1 ECS for 10 beds (public), 1 ECS per 100 sq.m. for remaining area 2. Commercial / Hotel - 3 ECS per 100 sq.m. of built up area 3. Club - 20 % area of the site. 8. Integrated Projects 1. Institutional (70% of the total area)- Educational - 2 ECS per 100 sq.m. + 2 ECS per 100sq.m. or fraction of administrative office area Hospital = 1 ECS per 10 beds (public), 1 ECS per 05 beds (private), remaining 1 ECS per 100sq.m. 2. Residential (25% of the total area) - 1 ECS per 100 sq.m. of built up area 3. Commercial CMawAstcemwan 9. Proposals for Parking as per Master Plan-2031 Residential Area 1. Construction of underground community parking /beneath parks to accommodate cars Ivehicles. 2. Permitting underground parking within courtyard plots. 3. Utilizing services lanes of first phase sectors for parking. 4. Linking registration of cars with certification lavailability of parking space. 5. Enabling use of neighborhood level educational campuses for parking during off working hours. Commercial Area 1. City Centre Sector 17: The City Centre, Sector17 is facing acute shortage of parking, RITES has projected deficit of 3000 car spaces in Sector 17. The deficit is to be addressed through underground parking lots for which sites have been identified at the four corers along the 9 

internal loop road of the centre. Proposal of underground parking near Gurdev Studio is already constructed. The other parking lots are also to be taken up subsequently. 2. Similar proposals are recommended for other existing underutilized underground parking lots at the rear of the shopping centers in sectors 8, 9, 7, 26, Chandigarh. Neighborhood Shopping Centers 1. Comprehensive Urban Renewal proposal for neighborhood shopping centers shall address the problem of parking on a case to case basis. 2. Creation of car free areas in the neighborhood shopping centers to be delineate based on detailed studylanalysis. The car free concept for neighborhood shopping centers revolves around transforming shopping centers from chaotic car dominating place to a vibrant pedestrian. 3. Car/vehicle free zone to be accessed comfortably and enjoyed by the residents. 4. As a pilot project Neighborhood Shopping Centre, Sector 11 shall be taken up, where proposal of taking the V4 and parking sub-grade can be explored while leaving free access to residential houses along V4. The feasibility of the concept and the view point of the stakeholders to be taken to finalize the proposal. 5. In case of Sector 23 1 Sector 8 for example, the underground parking can be created be near the internal central court which will release land for open space pedestrian plaza above. Parking Solution for Institutional Buildings. Parking within campus - Additional FAR is being allowed for making provisions 1. Multilevel parking blocks 2. For already constructed campuses which are architecturally controlled - underground parking beyond the footprint of buildings/ along institutional belts Jan Marg and Madhya Marg. 3. Parking demands can be controlled by implementing transport management measures such as Use of car pools for schools and offices. Carf free days ones in a week. Segregated timing of office hours Use of power driven vehicles within car free zones. Parking facilities at MRTS corridor 1. Parking lots at Metro Stations / Metro Nodes. 2. Park and Ride concept shall be facilitated at Metro/BRTS/Bus Stands. 3. Augmentation of parking facilities with latest State of the Art technology. 4. Whilst the ongoing proposals for multilevel parking are adopting traditional practices, in view of cost considerations, it is recommended that in future semi-automated /1 fully automated / latest 10 

technology is adopted which will optimize space within city. The selection of the type of parking system shall take into consideration the ground realities/ feasibility / urban design aspects. 5. To maintain the green open spaces within city, underground parking lots are recommended as a general solution, however, in the Industrial Area, where high rise buildings are being constructed, over ground parking lots can be considered as community parking in vacant parking lots. 6. Mandating full occupancy of cars entering commercial centers and other designated areas. 11 

