CHANDIGARH ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT NOTIFICATION Dated: s/-02- 2.022 No. FII (9)-2022/1533 Whereas in exercise of the powers conferred under section 6 & 25 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, the central government has notified Construction and Demolition Waste Management Rules, 2016 for the managemênt of Construction and Demolition waste. Whereas, in exercise of the powers conferred under Sub-Rule (1) of Rule 9 of the Construction and Demolition Waste Management Rules, 2016, notified under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 on 29th March, 2016, the Administrator, Union Territory Chandigarh, is hereby pleased to notify Chandigarh Construction and Demolition Waste Management Policy, 2022. This Policy defines the roles and responsibilities of the waste generators and various stakeholders and give thrust to segregation, recovery, reuse, recycle at source and address in detail the management of Construction and Demolition waste. Policy 1. Short Title 0) This policy shall be called "The Chandigarh Construction and Demolition Waste Management Policy, 2022". (i) This shall come into force on the date of publication in the Gazette. 2. Applicability and Scope Except otherwise expressly provided, this policy shall apply to all generators of Construction and Demolition waste, within the geographical area vested in the Corporation from time to time by the Government including all public and private places irrespective of its use or ownership, ie., dwelling, trading, commercial, administrative, professional, industrial, governmental, semi-govermental, educational, religious, recreational. social and all other usages. 3. Definitions In this policy unless the context otherwise requires () "Construction" means the process of erecting of building or built facility or other structure or building of infrastructure including alteration in these entities. (ii) "Demolition" means breaking down or tearing down of buildings and other structures either manually or using mechanical force (by various equipments) or by implosion using explosives. 

(ii) Construction and demolition waste" means the waste comprising of building materials, debris and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition of any structure. (iv) "Waste generator" means any person or association of persons or institution, residential and commercial establishments including Indian Railways, Airport, Defense Establishment etc. who undertakes construction of or demolition of any civil structure which generate construction and demolition waste. (v) "Bulk waste generator" means any person or association of persons or institution, residential and commercial establishments who undertakes construction of or demolition of any civil structure which generate construction and demolition waste 20 Tons or more in 1 Day or 300 Tons or more per project in a Month. (vi) Hazardous Waste" means any waste which by reason of any of its physical, chemical, reactive, toxic, flammable, explosive or corrosive characteristics causes danger or likely to cause danger to health or environment, whether alone or when in contact with other wastes or substances and include the hazardous waste defined in the hazardous waste defined in the Hazardous and Other Wastes (Management and Tran boundary Movement) Rules, 2016 or any other amendment thereof. (vii) Words and expressions used but not defined herein shall have same meaning as defined in the Environment (Protection) Act. 4. Aim of Policy The aim of policy is to ensure implementation of Construction and Demolition Waste Management Rules, 2016 issued by Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change on 29th March, 2016 to provide reuse of recycled/processed waste to save mining and environment. 5. Process/Procedure to be followed while dealing with C&D Waste () Every waste generator will dump the C&D waste only at waste processing plant presently located at Industrial Area Phase-l, Chandigarh or any other designated location, either by their own conveyance or by requesting machinery from Municipal Corporation Chandigarh (at Toll Free No.0172- 2787200) by paying the requisite charges as mentioned in clause 8. (i) If waste generator intends to transport C&D waste by their own conveyance he will inform the municipal corporation, over toll free number with the following information : (a) Name and address of waste generator (b) Vehicle No., Type and approximate quantity of C&D waste 

(c) Approximate time by which vehicle will reach designated C&D waste location site. Above information can also be furnished by self-registration at Municipal Corporation website for which appropriate link will be made available in due course. (ii) Municipal Corporation at the designated C&D waste at major dumpsite will make arrangements to weight the C&D waste delivered and give a receipt indicating the quantity of C&D waste received and quantity of processed material that waste generator will be eligible to receive, free of cost. (iv) Those waste generator who have paid C&D processing charges at the time of approval of building plans will be entitled to receive back processed material free of cost amounting to 50% of the charges paid at the time of approval of building plans, within one year, as per Clause 9(1). (v) Those waste generators who did not pay C&D waste processing charges at the time of building plans or in those cases where C&D waste was generated by any activity not requiring approval of building plans (such as renovation of the existing buiding/structure etc.), will be entitled free of cost C&D processed material equivalent to 50% of the charges calculated and paid in terms of Clause 9(ii). (vi) Dumping of C&D waste on road sides, waste dumpsite and any other non- designated places shall not be permitted. In case of illegal dumping of C&D waste, tansporters'generators will be fined Rs.5,500/- per vehicle for dumping the unprocessed waste in low lying sites/land-fills or any public place in Chandigarh. Rates shall be increased by Rs 500 annually from 1st April of every year. The authority to issue the Challan will rest with SDE/JE of Road Wing/Enforcement Inspectors of M.C. Chandigarh. 6. Duties of the waste generator (Bulk and Non-Bulk) (i) Every waste generator (Bulk and Non-Bulk) shall prima-facie be responsible for collection, segregation (into five streams such as concrete, bricks & mortar, soil, steel, wood & plastics) and storage of construction and demolition waste SO generated. (i) Every waste generator (Bulk/Non-Bulk or Private/Public Deptt.) shall reduce construction and demolition waste preferably up to the size of 1ft. nominal size. Generator will ensure soil/earth content is not more than 10% in the C&D waste. In case silt soillearth content increases beyond 10%, then the quantity of allowable processed material that a generator/producer can take 

back free of cost will be reduced to 30% instead of 50% of the charges paid or quantity of C&D waste deposited. (ii) No hazardous waste coming out of the demoition/construction site shall be mixed with C&D waste. The Hazardous waste shall be segregated and disposed by producerlgenerator as per guidelines of Municipal Corporation Chandigarh Solid Waste Management Byelaws, 2018. 7. Duties of Municipal Corporation Chandigarh () Municipal Corporation Chandigarh has developed major site for storage/stacking & processing of construction & demolition waste at Industrial Area Phase-l, wherein screening of C&D waste, crushing of coarse material into different types of aggregates and their separation by screening and washing etc. is being carried out to produce following recycled materials and its by-products: (a) Washed sand (b) Filling Sand/Silt (c) Crushed aggregates: 10 mm, 20 mm, 40 mm (d) PCC products made of Recycled aggregates (Paver blocks, kerbs, channels, tiles, etc) () The recycled materials and its by-products will be issued/sold to Public/Govt. organizations on reasonable rates to promote usage of recycled material. The rates will be specified from time to time by Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh. (ili) The Municipal Corporation has already set up toll free No.0172-2787200. Any waste generator can avail services under this policy by dialing above toll free number. 8. Levy of Transportation Charges and Implementation of Construction & Demolition Waste Management Rules, 2016 (i) Transportation should be done by every waste generatoriproducer by sending the generated waste to the C&D at Indl. Area Ph-1 or any other designated site at their own cost or by requesting the Municipal Corporation through Toll Free Number to lift the construction & demolition waste from their premises (on payment of specified charges). There will be fixed transportation charges upto first 5 Kms linear road distance (as per Google Maps) from collection point to C&D waste designated site, with additional charges per km for distance beyond 5 Kms. Such charges will be specified by the Municipal Corporation from time to time. 

(i) All the Government Departments such as M.C. Chandigarh, UT Engineering Department, Chandigarh Housing Board and other Boards/Corporations/undertakings in the city shall ensure that all contractors and maintenance staff use processed material as well as its by- products casted from C&D waste for their works allotted to contractors by including the requisite conditions in the Tender Document. However, in case of non-availability of processed materials at C&D plant, non-availability certificate will be obtained before resorting to purchase of material from open market. 9. Levy of Construction & Demolition Waste processing charges at the time of approval of building plans : (i) Res.dentsy.commerca establishmentsprvate institutions who intent to re- construct their buildings at the time of approval of Building Plan by Estate Office UT or Municipal Corporation shall be levied, the C&D waste processing charges @Rs.1 170/- per square meter of total covered area of all floors to be demolished and for new construction @Rs 20/- per square meter of total proposed covered area of all floors to be constructed. These rates shali be increased by 5% annually on base rate from 1st April of every year. () The public establishments (Government, semi-government, autonomous, etc.) shall deposit the charges, as mentioned in clause 9(i), at the time of submission of building plan to Estate Office, U.T. Chandigarh (ii) Generatorsproducers of C&D waste other than covered in 9(1) & (ii) i.e. in whose case the approval of building plan is not required or building plan stand already approved before the notification of this policy, shall be liable to pay processing fee @ Rs. 220/- per MT + GST as applicable. This fee shall be increased by 05% annually on base rate from 1st April of every year. The generatorproducer as per 9 (i) (ii) & (ii) above will also be allowed to take the processed materials (free of cost) amounting to 50% of the charges paid, at the time of approval of building plan or 50% the amount paid under Clause 9(ii) in those cases where C&D waste was generated in an activity not requiring approval of building plan. 10. For nearby project sites outside the city limits and within 25 km radius including adjoining areas of nearby corporations, Construction & Demolition waste may be transported by the generator/producer for processing to C&D Plant at Industrial Area Phase-I, Chandigarh. The processing fee will be charged as Rs.220/- per MT+ GST as 

No. PA/DITI. Dated.. applicable. It shall be increased 5% annually on base rate from 1st April of every year. Such generators/producers will also be allowed to take the processed materials (free of cost) amounting to 50% of the charges paid for processing at their own transportation cost. 11. Right to Interpret () If any question relating to the interpretation of this policy arises it shall be referred to the Municipal Commissioner who shall give his/her decision and that decision shall be final and binding. (ii) No appeal thereto in any court of law is maintainable. (ii) This notification supersedes all previous ordervorcuarnotrcatons in this regard, from the date of notification. 12. Appeal If any dispute is arised at any time or a person aggrieved have any issue then the Commissioner, Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh or any authorized person on his/her behalf may settle the issue. W w& bt DHARAM PAL, IAS RML Adviser to the Administrator, UT, Chandigarh DHloahz Endst. No.FII(9)-2022 11534 Dated: DI-02- 20 2- A copy is forwarded to the Controller, Printing & Stationery Department, U.T., AP - Chandigarh with the request to publish this notification in The Chandigarh Administration Gazette (Extraordinary) and supply 20 copies of the notification to this department for official use and record. S a Additional secretary Local Government Chandigarh Adntinistration Endst. No.-FI(9)-2022/ 1535 Dated : o/- 02 2027 A copy is forwarded to the Director Information Technology with the request to publish the notification in the official website of Chandigarh Administration. Additional secretary Local Government Chandigarh Administration Endst. No.-FI(9)-2022 1536 Dated: ol- 0) 10 A 2 A copy is forwarded to the Director, Public Relations, U.T., Chandigarh for taking necessary action. ) ) - Additional secretary Local Government Chandigarh Administration 

