CHANDIGARH ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY & RENEWABLE ENERGY Draft Notification Chandigarh, dated the 2022 No. SATARE20221.1349. - Whereas climate change has become a global concern over the last few decades and the road transport sector contributes a major role for rapid increase in the global temperature and therefore, there is need for reduction in the use of fossil fuel and associated emissions. Whereas the Government of India have urged upon all States and Union Territories to adopt a well defined Electric Vehicle Policy' in their respective States/UTs. Now, therefore, the Chandigarh Administration have framed a "Draft Electric Vehicle Policy, 2022" to build UT Chandigarh as a Model EV City' by achieving one of the highest penetration of zero emission vehicles amongst all Indian cities by the end of the Policy period. The details of the draft EV Policy-2022 is annexed herewith as Annexure-1. Whereas the Administrator, Union Territory, Chandigarh intends to keep the "Draft Electric Vehicle Policy, 2022" in the public domain for a period of thirty days for inviting suggestions/comments of all the stakeholders and general public of UT Chandigarh. This Draft Policy is available on official website of the department; solar.chd.gov.in under News & Updates Section as well as on Chandigarh Administration's website; chandigarh.gov.in. Any suggestion/comment for inclusion or omission in the draft EV Policy may be brought to the notice of the Chief Executive Officer, Chandigarh Renewable Energy & Science & Technology Promotion Society (CREST), UT Chandigarh, Office: Paryavaran Bhawan (1st Floor), Sector 19-B, Chandigarh, within the stipulated period from the date of issue ofi this notification, either in-person, post or email estlandmnoamalcm. DHARAM PAL, IAS Chandigarh dated Adviser to the Administrator the 10th February, 2022 Chandigarh Administration Endst.No. Chandigarh, Dated the A copy is forwarded to all HODs/ Boards/ Corporations, Chandigarh Administration for information. <d (Debendra Dalai), IFS Secretary (S&T&RE) Chandigarh Administration Page 1 of2 

Endst.No. Chandigarh, Dated the 1. PS to Hon'ble Administrator, UT Chandigarh, for kind information 2. PS to Adviser to the Administrator, for kind information please. please. (Debendra Dalai), IFS Secretary (S&T&RE) Chandigarh Administration Endst.No. 1S24 Chandigarh, Dated the o 62 2022 1. The Director Public Relation, Chandigarh Administration with the request that the above notification may kindly be given wide publicity. 2 The Director Information Technology, Chandigarh Administration, information with a request to get it uploaded on the website Chandigarh, of for Administration. Chandigarh 3. The Nodal Officer of e-Gazette Notification, Department of Science & Tech. & RE, UT Chandigarh for uploading this notification on the Chandigarh Administration portal. e-Gazette (Debendra Dalai), IFS Secretary (S&T&RE) Chandigarh Administration Page 2 of2 

ANNEXURE-I CHANDIGARH Draft Electric Vehicle Policy - 2022 EIg WETETET CARHADMINIESR 1 

Table of Contents 1. Introduction 2. Definitions. 2.1 Electric' Vehicle (EV). 2.2 Retrofit Kits.. 2.3 Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE). 3. Vision, Mission, Objectives.. 3.1 Vision 3.2 Mission. 3.3 Policy Objectives. 4. Policy Period. 5. Policy Actions 5.1 Driving Electric Vehicle Adoption 5.1.1 Driving Electric Vehicle Adoption: Early Bird Incentive 5.1.2 Provisions applicable across vehicle segments. 5.2 Charging Infrastructure. 5.2.1 Private Charging points:. 5.2.2 Public Charging Infrastructure.. d0 5.3 Mobile application-based IT Platform for Public Charging Stations (PCS). 6. Innovation & Technology 9 7. Recycling Ecosystem Battery and Electrical Vehicles 10 8. Skill Development, training and Job creation 11 9. Responsibility Matrix. 11 10. Institutional Structure. .12 10.1 UT Electric Vehicle Advisory Committee 12 10.2 UT Electric' Vehicle Implementation Committee. 12 10.3 Electric' Vehicle Cell. 13 11. UT EV Fund. .13 12. Financial Outlay toi implement the policy: 13 13. Annexure I- Abbreviations 14 2 

1. Introduction The adoption of electric vehicles (EVs) contributes to a wide range of sustainability goals. These include better air quality, reduced noise pollution, enhanced energy security, and reduced greenhouse gas emissions among others. With vehicular pollution being a growing source of air pollution in Chandigarh and contributing substantially to particulate pollution in city, rapid adoption of ero-talpipe-emission vehicles is essential. The government adopted the Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Hybrid and EV (FAME) scheme to promote adoption and manufacturing of EVS. While there has been growth in EV adoption, the low penetration of electric vehicles is largely due to four critical barriers: a) High upfront purchase price of EVs b) Limited EV product offerings comparable to ICE vehicles c) Inadequate public charging infrastructure d) Low levels of awareness about EVs and their benefits. The slow uptake of EVs and the changing policy, technology, and market landscape have created a need for the Chandigarh Administration to draft its EV Policy, in order to accelerate EV adoption in the UT. This policy orioritizes public and shared transport, goods carriers and two-wheelers to drive adoption of EVs. 2. Definitions 2.1 Electric Vehicle (EV) All vehicles in with advanced batteries (both fixed and swappable) having passed all the eligibility and testing conditions as specified under FAME II scheme AND purchased & registered in Chandigarh shall be eligible for incentives. Any conditions/specifiations/nclusions/exclusions other than FAME II are either specified in this policy or shall be separately notified by CREST from time to time. 2.2 Retrofit Kits Retrofit kits eligible for incentives under this policy include kits for conversion from ICE to advanced battery-operated Electric Vehicles and shall be approved by a competent agency under Rule 126 of CMVR, 1989 or as notified by the Transport Department, Chandigarh Government. 2.3 Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE) Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE) shall mean an element in Electric Vehicle (EV) charging infrastructure that supplies electric energy for recharging the battery of Electric Vehicles. EVSE shall be type tested by an agency/lab accredited by National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL)/ Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) from time to time. 3. Vision, Mission, Objectives 3.1 Vision To enable zero emission mobility adoption for achieving carbon neutrality in Chandigarh by 2030. 3 

3.2 Mission To provide an enabling framework through incentives and initiatives for promoting zero emission mobility with societal, economic and environmental considerations at forefront. 3.3 Policy Objectives To accelerate adoption of EVs in the UT SO that they contribute to 80% of new vehicle registrations by the end of policy period. To support adoption of Electric Vehicles in every vehicle category prioritizing phase-wise transition with following targets: Target Category (Share ofEVs ini new vehicle registrations by the end of policy period) Year-1 Year-2 Year-3 Year-4 Year-5 e-2W 35% 70% 100% 100% 100% e-3W (Passenger 35% 70% 100% 100% 100% Autos) e-3W (Goods) 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% e-4W Goods 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% e-Cars Personal 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% e Cars Commercial 20% 40% 60% 80% 100% (Local Permit) 100% eB Buses 40% 50% 80% 90% Electric/Alternate Fuel EV Charging stations will be increased as EV Charging stations 50 100 per requirement To establish Chandigarh as a Model EV City' by achieving one of the highest penetration of Zero Emission Vehicles amongst all Indian cities, by the end of policy period. To leverage the cycling track infrastructure of city for promoting usage of Electric Bicycles as a replacement of 2/4W especially for short trips. To establish wide network of Charging points by enabling availability of power supply and related processes. To harness the New & Renewable Energy sources for charging of EVs to positively impact the indirect emissions. To enable fleet operators like E-commerce companies, last-mile delivery/logistics players and mobility aggregators transition to zero emission vehicles. To nurture skill development, R&D and startup for electric mobility space in the UT. To develop a communication plan focused on driving awareness regarding the key elements of this policy and the benefits of adopting EVs. 4 

4. Policy Period The policy shall be valid for a period of 5 years from the date of notification with a detailed review to be undertaken annually or as required. The incentives shall be extended only for the policy period unless otherwise stated/notified. 5. Policy Actions The policy lays out various financial, non-financial incentives and initiatives which would support adoption of Electric Vehicles, establishment of a wide network of Charging stations, Entrepreneurship development and roll out of training programmes for skilled manpower to support the Electric Vehicle ecosystem 5.1 Driving Electric Vehicle Adoption Electric Vehicles transition has several inherent challenges including high upfront purchase cost in comparison to ICE Vehicles, range anxiety, limited Charging Infrastructure and lack of awareness about lower total cost to ownership (TCOs) for some segments. Chandigarh Electric Vehicle Policy recognizes these challenges and creates provisions to incentivize adoption of all vehicle categories as listed below: Number of Electric Vehicle Maximum Incentive Vehicles to be Category Incentive incentivized First 25,000 Bicycle e-Bicycle Upfront: 25% of Cost of Bicycle Rs. 3,000 purchased during the policy period Upfront: : Fixed Battery: Rs. 5,000/kWh Rs. 30,000 First 10,000 vehicles registered during the e-2W Swappable Battery: Rs. 3000/kWh Rs. 15,000 policy period Scrapping :Rs! 5,000 Rs. 5,000 Upfront : Fixed Battery: Rs. 5000/kWh Rs. 30,000 First 1000 e-Carts e-Cart Swappable Battery: Rs. 3000/kWh Rs. 10,000 registered during the policy period Retrofit Kit: 15% of cost Rs.10,000 Upfront : Fixed Battery:Rs. 5000/kWh Rs. 30,000 First 1000 e-Autos e-Autos registered during the Swappable Battery:Rs. 3000/kWh Rs. 15,000 policy period Retrofit Kit: 15% of cost Rs. 15,000 5 

Scrapping : Rs 7,500 Rs. 7,500 Upfront : Fixed Battery:Rs. 5000/kWh Rs. 50,000 First 1000 Goods Carrier e-Goods Retrofit Kit: 15% of cost Rs. 15,000 L5N registered during the policy period Carrier L5N Scrapping: 15,000 Rs. 15,000 Upfront: Fixed Battery:Rs. 5000/kWh Rs. 80,000 First 1000 Goods Carrier e-Goods Retrofit Kit: 15% of cost Rs. 25,000 N1 registered during the Carrier N1 policy period Scrapping: 15,000 Rs. 15,000 Upfront: First 2000, 4 W- e-Cars Fixed Battery:Rs. 5,000/kWh Rs. 1,50,000 (Personal) (including Hybrids as defined in FAME II) registered 4V W-6 e-Cars Scrapping: 7000 Rs. 7,000 during the policy period. (Personal) Applicable only for vehicles with ex- showroom price below INR 20 lakhs Upfront: Fixed Battery: Rs. 10,000/kWh Rs. 2,00,000 First 1000, 4 W- e-Cars 4W-e-Cars (Commercial) (including (Commercial) Hybrids as defined in Scrapping: 7000 Rs. 7,000 FAME II) registered during the policy period All above incentives are over and above FAME-II policy incentives of GOI and are applicable only to those Electric' Vehicles (EV) which are Purchased and registered in Chandigarh. 5.1.1 Driving Electric Vehicle Adoption: Early Bird Incentive To drive quick adoption of Electric Vehicles and maximize reduction of Vehicle pollution, the policy provides for special Early Bird incentives as given in the below table:- 6 

Vehicle Category Early Bird Incentive Maximum Early Bird Incentive e-Bicycle Rs. 2000 Rs. 2,000 e-2W, e-Cart, e-Autos, e Goods Carrier (L5N and N1), e-4W Rs 3,500/kWh Rs. 50,000 (personal & commercial) VALIDITY: Electric Vehicles categories as mentioned under section 5.1 registered within 1st year of the policy period are eligible for early bird scheme. Scrapping Incentive Eligibility Criteria: Registered owner of Electric Vehicles as under section 5.1 shall also be eligible for a Scrapping Incentive. This shall be applicable only if the scrapped vehicle is: i. of same vehicle category as of Electric Vehicle and, ii. registered in Chandigarh. 5.1.2 Provisions applicable across vehicle segments. 1. Road Tax and registration fees shall be waived for all eligible vehicles registered during the period of this policy. 2. Operational guidelines notification for availing incentives shall be issued by CREST with the approval of Competent Authority. 3. All electric vehicles registered in Chandigarh shall be issued a green number plate in accordance with the notification No. F. No. T-1028/032018-MV. dated 07.08.2018 of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Govt. of India. 5.2 Charging Infrastructure Experience in other cities across the globe indicates that availability of charging infrastructure is a key driver of Electric Vehicle adoption. The objective of the policy shall be to create an enabling environment for establishing private as well as public charging infrastructure in-line with the Guidelines on Charging Infrastructure for Electric Vehicles (EV) as notified by Ministry of Power from time to time. 5.1.1 Private Charging points: It is expected that most Electric Vehicle users shall use home and workplace charging points for their core charging needs. However, charging points at these locations need to be engineered for safe charging of Electrical Vehicles, communicate with DISCOM to enable load management, and net metering (as per prevailing rules related to New & Renewable Energy). Following policy measures shall be put in place to encourage installation of such charging points within homes and workplaces to be implemented by this policy period 1. Chandigarh shall amend existing building bye-laws in accordance with Model Building Bye Laws, 2016 for Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure issued by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, Government of India. This shall make all new home and workplace parking slots 'EV ready' (i.e., with conduits and power supply infrastructure in place for Electric Vehicle chargers) for atleast 20% of all vehicle holding capacity/ parking. 7 

2. The building premises shall also enable additional power load, equivalent to the power required for all charging points to be operated simultaneously. 3. All New /Renovated residential and non-residential building owners shall be encouraged to install Private Charging Points (PCPs) within their premises. 4. In order to facilitate establishment of EV Charging infrastructure in housing societies, offices and other places for private/semi-private usage, CREST shall make an IT based platform. This platform shall provide one stop solution within defined timeline by enabling features such as power connection, standard models of EVSES, cost of equipment & installation and empaneled vendors. 5. Incentive Structure for Private Charging Stations is provided in the table-1 (Incentive Structure for Charging Infrastructure). 5.2.2 Public Charging Infrastructure: Providing accessible public charging facilities within every sector in Chandigarh is a key objective of this policy. Following are the key steps for public charging is taken through this policy: 1. Electricity tariff applicable for all Public and Captive charging stations for commercial use (i.e. charging facilities used by fleet owners) shall be as notified as per applicable JERC Tariff Order for every financial year. CREST shall endeavor to maintain the special electricity tariff for EV charging at the same rate as at present or lower for the entire duration of this policy as per specified under the table below: Current Energy Charges Notified by JERC for Public Charging Stations Energy Charges Fixed Charges Rs. 3.60 / kWh Nil Tariff applicable to Public Charging Station (PCS) shall also be applicable to Battery Charging Stations (BCS) and Battery Swapping Stations (BSS). Domestic charging shall be treated akin to domestic consumption NOTE: EV Charging Infrastructure is mandatory for all the Petrol Pumps (Both Private and Govt. Owned) operational in UT Chandigarh in 6 Months from the issuance of the final EV policy. If space is not available with the petrol pump, then the owner will make necessary arrangements for installing the Charging Stations in some nearby parking area belongs to U.T., Chandigarh. 2. Procedural guidelines regarding public charging station shall be notified separately by CREST. 3. Competent authority shall define and notify rates that may be offered by Public Charging Stations. 8 

Table-1 : Incentive Structure for Charging Infrastructure Maximum Maximum Number to be Category Incentive Incentive incentivized Infrastructure Incentive: Only for first 30,000 Private Grant on purchase and installation Rs. 6,000 private chargers installed Charging of charging equipment during policy period. Reimbursement of GST paid Only for first 50 fast 100% reimbursement of GST paid charging /Swapping EVSE on the Fast Charging/Swapping installed during policy Rs. 50,000 Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment period. (Will not be (EVSE) procured by private applicable on Chargers enterprises/ndividual under Central Subsidy) Only for first 50 Public fast Public Upfront electricity infrastructure: Charging/Swapping Stations installed in the Charging Upfront cost on infrastructure for Rs. 5,00,000 state during policy period. bringing power supply to Electric (Will not be applicable on Vehicle Charging Station Chargers under Central Subsidy) Electricity Duty Exemption: 100% Electricity duty exemption For policy For policy period for Public Charging and Swapping period stations 5.3 Mobile application-based IT Platform for Public Charging Stations (PCS) CREST will develop a mobile application whereby all the real time information on Electric Vehicle Charging Stations such as real time updates on time slot availability, type of charging infrastructure, available load of Charging Station, distance from present location of Electric Vehicle user and applicable tariff. CREST as a nodal agency will develop a single window platform which is integrated with all the stakeholders to provide the one stop solution to the User for various incentives under this policy. 6 Innovation & Technology This policy aims to foster research and innovation in electric mobility in Chandigarh and promote entrepreneurship in this space. The UT will support these objectives through following: i. Entrepreneurship Development: Electric Vehicle startups will be encouraged through following provisions: 9 

Startup Incentives Maximum Maximum Number to be Category Incentive Incentive incentivized Only for first 10 start-ups Infrastructure Grant of Rs 3000 per seat on Rs. related to Zero Emission Incentive monthly basis. 18,000/Month Mobility for policy period Start-ups registering national and international patents will be reimbursed up to 50% of the cost National incurred by the start-up in fees and all other costs 2,00,000 Only for first 10 eligible Patent Fee associated registration of IP patents Reimbursement, subject to a cap of INR 2 International lakh for national IP and INR 5,00,000 5 lakh for international IP. Eligibility Criteria for Startups Start-ups should be registered with Startup India with valid certificate of startup from GOI. Only those start-ups who has registered office in Chandigarh are eligible for this scheme. Only those startups who has their product/services/USP in EV-sector/ ecosystem are eligible for the above incentives. Under no circumstances shall the benefits under this scheme be considered an entitlement. The CREST shall reserve the sole right to accept or reject applications. ii. E-Mobility Centre of Excellence (COE): Administration of Chandigarh shall promote industry led CoEs for advance electric and automotive research in partnership with leading academic institutions/ange! networks/ industry partners in Chandigarh. 7 Recycling Ecosystem - Battery and Electrical Vehicles 1. The Policy shall encourage the reuse of EV batteries that have reached the end of their life and setting up of recycling businesses in collaboration with battery. 2. The Chandigarh administration will promote second-life usage and recycling of electric vehicle batteries. 3. Reuse of EV batteries: Disposal of Electric Vehicle Batteries in trash/landfills will be strictly prohibited. OEMS, through their networks, partnerships and retail centers will channelize battery collection for reuse. The guidelines for the same will be notified separately. 10 

Note : The businesses to invite battery recycling, reuse, storage etc. shall be finalized only after the amendment of Industrial Policy 2015 and subject to the clearance of CPCC only. 8 Skill Development, training and Job creation Electric Vehicle manufacturing and servicing requires skilled manpower which varies from conventional automobiles. In order to ensure smooth transition to electric mobility, special efforts shall be undertaken for skill development in Electric Vehicles. Short-term courses on electric mobility, EVSE, repair and maintenance, battery manufacturing and maintenance shall be developed and introduced by Education Department in collaboration with Transport department, Chandigarh. Polytechnics shall offer two-week duration courses on Electric Vehicle awareness for skill upgradation. Chandigarh Administration, in partnership with relevant/interested OEMS and service providers, shall develop skill enhancement centers for delivering vocational courses on the EV ecosystem. The skill enhancement centers will aim to train the ICE mechanics/workforce in repairing and servicing of EVs and charging stations. 9 Responsibility Matrix The responsibility of operationalization of the actionable in this policy will rest with the following departments: Policy Section Nodal and Other Related Departments Nodal Department: CREST 5.1 Driving Adoption Transport Department Finance Department Nodal Department: Electricity Department, Municipal Corporation, Chandigarh Electric Vehicle Charging 5.2 Urban Estate Infrastructure CREST Chandigarh Housing Board. Nodal Department: Information Technology Department 6 Innovation & Entrepreneurship Industries Department Education Department CREST Nodal Department: CPCC 7 Recycling & Reuse CREST Industries Department Nodal Department: Education Department 8 Skill Development & Training ITI Department CREST 11 

Nodal Department: CREST Capacity Building and IT System Transport Department 9 update Education Department ITI Department 10 Institutional Structure There should be a dual level Institutional structure for smooth implementation of Electric Vehicle initiatives is as under: 10.1 UT Electric Vehicle Advisory Committee Hon'ble Advisor Chairman CEO, CREST Member Secretary Secretary Home Member Secretary Finance Member Secretary Transport Member Secretary Power Member Secretary Estates Member Deputy Commissioner Member ACO, CREST Member The UT Electric Vehicle Advisory Committee shall meet at least once every 6 months and will perform the following roles: Review the implementation and effectiveness of the UT Electric Vehicle policy and undertake necessary amendments if required to achieve the objectives of the policy. Recommend/Amend enabling institutional structure necessary to implement this policy if required. Advise on inter-departmental coordination on matters related to this policy. 10.2 UT Electric Vehicle Implementation Committee CEO, CREST Chairman Director Transport Member Commissioner, MC Member Estate Officer Member Special Secretary, Finance Member Chief Architect, Urban planning Member Chief Engineer, Engineering Department Member Project Director, 1 CREST Member Secretary The UT Electric Vehicle implementation Committee shall meet at least once in every 2 months and will perform the following roles: Implement the framework of this policy and undertake necessary amendments if required at the ground level to achieve the objectives of the policy 12 

Develop/formulate oPnoticatonypucelines for further progression of this policy. Invite industry stakeholders to understand their challenges and adopt suitable measures to mitigate the same and propose any amendments as required Recommend to Advisory committee for amendment in the members of the implementation committee as per the requirements from time to time bases. 10.3 Electric Vehicle Cell UT Electric Vehicle implementation Committee will be operationally supported by a dedicated Electric Vehicle Cell under the leadership of CEO, CREST. An Officer In-charge for Electric Vehicle will be engaged to play a pivotal role in day-to-day monitoring and implementation of projects towards achieving the objectives of the Electric Vehicle Policy. The Electric Vehicle Cell shall also be responsible for addressing any grievances related to the Chandigarh Electric Vehicle Policy. 11 UT EV Fund The Chandigarh Administration aims to create a 'UT EV Fund'. The Fund shall be used to promote EV adoption, including providing incentives for EVs and EV infrastructure. The UT EV Fund will aggregate the funds by following ways : 1. Through annual Budgetary Provision by UT administration. 2. Allocated funds from combination of "Green Cess" on: a. Road tax applicable to all ICE vehicles only, b. Conventional Fuel, C. Electricity 'Green Cess' rates in line with this provision shall be notified separately by CREST, U.T., Chandigarh. 12 Financial Outlay to implement the policy: The UT Administration would provide necessary budgetary allocation during the policy period. The overall budget would be allocated across the target segments in line with the guidelines prescribed in the FAME II. 13 

13 Annexure I- Abbreviations EV Electric Vehicle ICE Internal Combustion Engine PHEV Plug-in hybrid Electric Vehicle BEV Battery Electric' Vehicle OEM Original Equipment Manufacturer R&D Research and Development RTO Regional Transport Office CPO Charging Point Operator PCS Public Charging Station e2W Electric 2 wheeler e3W Electric 3 wheeler e4W Electric 4 wheeler / Passenger cars CCS Combined Charging system ChaDeMO Charge De Move Li Lithium AC Alternating Current DC Direct Current BMS Battery Management System MOHUA Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs JERC Joint Electricity Regulatory Comission CPCC Chandigarh Pollution Control Committee NA Not applicable mtr Meter/s INR Indian National Rupee Cr Crore GVW Gross Vehicle weight CMVR Central Motor Vehicle Rules FAME Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid &) Electric Vehicles HVAC Heating Ventilation and Air Conditioning 14 

