Heuhaa aun Information Technology & Electronics Policy, Chandigarh 2013 DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY CHANDIGARH ADMINISTRATION 

Information Technology & Electronics Policy, Chandigarh, 2013 Contents PREAMBLE 3 I. VISION - 2020 4 II. OBJECTIVES 5 III. STRATEGIES 6 1. Enabling service delivery through e-Governance & m-Governance. 6 2. Creation of next generation IT Infrastructure. 7 3. To improve the environment for the IT& ITES industry 8 4. To enhance availability & quality oftalent pool ofIT professionals 8 5. To support MSMES, YEs to establish and grow in various verticals ofthe IT industry. 9 6. Information Security 9 7. To focus on promotion of] Electronics System Design and Manufacturing 10 8. Other provisions 10 IV. DEFINITIONS 12 Page 2 of 12 

Information Technology & Electronics Policy, Chandigarh, 2013 PREAMBLE Over the last few decades, evolutions in the Information Technology & Electronics (ITE) arena have emerged as the most significant enablers for improving efficiency & effectiveness of the government & non-goverment organizations. Chandigarh Administration recognizes the enormous potential of Electronics and Information technology and has made significant efforts to ensure that thel benefits of these sectors percolate to its citizens. Rajiv Gandhi Chandigarh Technology Park (RGCTP) which started in 2005 has emerged as a major centre for IT exports from the region. RGCTP presently hosts around 70 companies from the IT world and provides direct employment to more than 20,000 persons. RGCTP itself generates exports of around Rs 1750 Crores annually. Chandigarh, as a whole, has exports of around Rs 1850 Crores annually (source: Data from STPI Mohali). This is remarkable as compared with the modest Rs 92 Crore export figure for 2005-06. This growth is a result of the focus created on IT through the IT & ITES policies of Chandigarh which were made in 2000 & 2003 respectively. Now that the ITE world is getting ready for the next level of transformations through technological breakthroughs, it is felt that the existing policies of Chandigarh need to be updated to make them more contemporary and enabling. In its continuing endeavor to promote the IT / ITES Industry in the city, this policy attempts to develop a more modern and vibrant ecosystem for Electronics and IT industry to support electronic governance initiatives of the Government of India and attract investment and talent to such industries in Chandigarh. Key focus areas of the policy include pioneering e- Governance initiatives, research & development in Electronic System Design and manufacturing, support of the Micro Small & Medium Enterprises and promotion of entrepreneurship that harnesses the huge talent pool of the people ofChandigarh. Page 3 of 12 

Information Technology & Electronics Policy, Chandigarh, 2013 I. VISION - 2020 1. To improve the delivery of public services by leveraging Information Technology to achieve Efficiency, Effectiveness, Economy, Transparency, Accountability and Reliability in such delivery. 2. To improve the environment for IT Industry in Chandigarh. 3. To boost adoption ofl Information Technology to bridge the digital divide. 4. To create knowledge based society in Chandigarh. 5. To tap the growth potential of Electronics System Design & Manufacturing industry to the optimum. Page 4 of 12 

Information Technology & Electronics Policy, Chandigarh, 2013 II. OBJECTIVES 1. To facilitate delivery of public services in electronic form through e-Governance and m- Governance by using various services delivery channels including self-service mode. 2. To create and upgrade Chandigarh's IT infrastructure to meet present and future needs of e-Governance and m-Governance applications. 3. To further enhance efficiency, economy and reliability of delivery of services by use of emerging technologieslservices such as cloud computing and mobile-based value added services. 4. To develop among citizens/public authorities the awareness of and the competence to be savvy users of Information Technology 5. To promote AADHAAR enabled services to ensure effectiveness of the delivery of public services. 6. To formulate an information security policy for Chandigarh to ensure confidentiality, authenticity, integrity and availability ofits information. 7. To support entrepreneurs to establish and grow in various verticals of the IT industry by providing them incentives. 8. To make two individuals (at least one female) in every household e-literate SO as to bridge the digital divide. 9. To enhance digital literacy and increase employability of youth by strengthening of the IT curriculum and infrastructure of educational institutions and promoting the use of IT. 10. To raise awareness among the school and college children and society as a whole regarding environmentally sound e-Waste management and take steps for its proper disposal. 11. To implement a uniform website policy for the Chandigarh Administration with emphasis on user-friendliness: of the interface for all inclusive percolation of the benefits of the IT. 12. To encourage research & development and innovation in product design, testing, calibration and production in Electronics System Design & Manufacturing industry for tapping the potential in the IT hardware and the electronics industry. Page 5 of 12 

Information Technology & Electronics Policy, Chandigarh, 2013 III. STRATEGIES 1. Enabling service delivery through e-Governance & m-Governance 1.1. Enabling actions shall be taken for implementation of existing and future Mission Mode Projects under National e-Governance Plan and other IT initiatives. 1.2. Chandigarh Administration shall mandate adoption of rules, policies, guidelines and standards issued by the Government of India for delivery ofe e-Services. 1.3. e-enablement of all public services shall be carried out, which would include e- submission of forms, electronic workflows, e-payments, online/sms-based status tracking and final delivery of services through e-means. It would also include (wherever required) cross-sharing of data amongst various departments/ Govt. agencies, and e-Authentication. 1.4. For delivering e-services to citizens, Chandigarh Administration will promote the use of upcoming technologies like NFC, Cloud Computing and Social Media. Further, multiple channels like mobile phones, tablets, call centers, TV etc will be used for such delivery. Also, self-service kiosks shall be installed across the city at prominent locations like Sampark Centres, Departments etc. 1.5. Digitization of office records, Back-end computerization of offices (through e-office project), use of Digital Signature Certificates, Information Security and IT Capacity Building shall be promoted to enhance the Govt.'s capacity to implement good/e- governance initiatives. 1.6. Efforts would be undertaken to provide at least 100 services through mobile devices for on-the-move' service delivery. Endeavour will be to provide services Anywhere, Anytime, Any device'. 1.7. Chandigarh Administration shall mandate for all the Departments to earmark necessary plan funds annually for e-Governance. However, a cap on hardware procurement would be prescribed. 1.8. Considering the high social relevance of e-Governance, Chandigarh Administration would work out special mechanism for according fast-track financial, legal and administrative approvals to e-Governance projects. 1.9. A knowledge resource / digital library will be setup that will maintain a repository of documents for use by general public and Govt. authorities. This would include official gazette notifications, acts, rules, regulations, circulars, policies and scheme documents for electronic access in a time bound manner. Page 6 of 12 

Information Technology & Electronics Policy, Chandigarh, 2013 1.10. To make citizen-government interface more efficient and effective, Chandigarh Administration shall notify the acceptance of correspondence through emails received from the public. Further, use of official email ID would be mandated by Chandigarh Administration for all official communications, which, inter alia, includes (i) responding back to such correspondence of citizens and (ii) for intra- and inter-departmental communication within the Chandigarh Administration and communication with Govt. of India. 1.11. "Centre of Excellence in e-Governance' shall be set up to conceptualize & test new technologies and to build capacity amongst Chandigarh Administration personnel and citizens. Further, special campaigns shall be organized from time to time to sensitise the citizens on adoption/Applications ofIT. 1.12. Chandigarh Administration would, set up a user-friendly e-Vault and email IDs for lifelong archiving for each citizen, company and departments to enable them to secure their digital dialog, correspondence and important documents. 1.13. To train citizens in basic IT skills by through various social platforms to enable them to avail ofe e-services in self-service mode. 1.14. An endeavour would be made to analyse the behaviour of the citizens in usage of Government portals sO as to constantly improve these portals and make them more user- friendly. 2. Creation of next generation IT Infrastructure 2.1. Creation of next generation IT Infrastructure and up-gradation of existing IT infrastructure in accordance with National guidelines shall be undertaken to bring it at par with the world class state-of-the-art infrastructure. 2.2. Further, development of IT infrastructure shall be undertaken to support the increasing requirements of Chandigarh including the rural areas to ensure that high speed internet connectivity reaches every citizen. 2.3. Setting up of a State Data Centre to provide on-the-go' services (e.g. cloud based) to all the departments ofChandigarh Administration to minimize the overheads associated with managing the physical infrastructure and to ensure that all the components of IT infrastructure (Hardware, Software, Network etc.) would be available as simple and configurable services. 2.4. Department of IT shall endeavor to provide every citizen of Chandigarh with high speed internet access (wired and wireless) for creation of smart city infrastructure This will be achieved, inter alia, through (i) making Chandigarh a Wi Fi city, (1i) creation of fibre ready homes. 2.5. Chandigarh Administration shall encourage Green IT initiatives. Page 7 of 12 

Information Technology & Electronics Policy, Chandigarh, 2013 2.6. Department of IT shall assist the departments of Chandigarh Administration in disposing off their unusable, redundant and irreparable IT infrastructure as per the guidelines of e- waste management. For this, guidelines on the obsolescence of IT Hardware will be formulated. 3. To improve the environment for the IT& ITES industry Following incentives shall be made available for IT & ITES industry operating from Chandigarh: 3.1. A Venture Capital Fund, with a corpus of Rs 20 crores shall be created from the budget of the Chandigarh Administration to provide funds to micro & small enterprises and young entrepreneurs in the IT& ITES industry for capital expenditure (including land and building, patents etc) at prescribed interest rates. 3.2. Endeavour would be to provide uninterrupted power supply to notified IT parks in Chandigarh. 3.3. The Department of IT (DoIT) shall be the Single Window for queries, submission of requests, approvals and follow-up process. 4. To enhance availability & quality of talent pool of IT professionals 4.1. IT shall be extensively promoted by schools and colleges: 4.1.1. Facilitating creation and up-gradation oft the IT infrastructure for interactive education at schools and promoting advanced virtual class room courses at colleges. 4.1.2. Strengthening of IT & Personality Development Program/soft skills curriculum with significant weightage in overall pertormance grades and spreading of awareness about job opportunities in IT. 4.1.3. Facilitating training and development of IT skills as well as Personality Development Program for teachers and encouraging them to use IT to enhance the effectiveness of teaching. 4.1.4. Encouraging introduction of IT Clubs for students & faculty. 4.1.5. Facilitating partnership between educational institutes and industry to provide courses/ training on emerging IT technologies. 4.2. Providing support for standardized ITES-BPO certification for job aspirants for the ITES industry. The certification shall be granted by Department of Information Technology in association with the private sector thus adding credibility to the IT Professional skills, reducing time and cost of hiring for recruiters. 4.3. Facilitating setting up of e-learning centers, in rural/ slum areas for promotion of IT education along with soft skills development and spreading awareness about job opportunities in IT. Page 8 of 12 

Information Technology & Electronics Policy, Chandigarh, 2013 4.4. Possibility ofi introducing distance learning program/ vocational courses shall be explored in this respect. This would enable "anytime anywhere" learning. 4.5. Spreading awareness about job opportunities in IT and facilitating short term job oriented certificate courses in various IT skills and Personality Development Program for unemployed educated youth. 4.6. Encouraging IT literacy among employees of Chandigarh Administration by conducting IT trainings as well as gradually making IT literacy an essential requirement for relevant employment categories of Chandigarh Administration. 4.7. Data bank of students who are IT literate and suitable for deployment in the IT industry would be maintained and shared with the industry. This would enable the industry to have easy access to the skilled manpower. 4.8. A panel of IT companies would be formed, which would provide internship / training opportunities to the students of the UT. 5. To support MSMES, YEs to establish and grow in various verticals of the ITindustry 5.1. IT Incubation centers would be set-up in some identified colleges, where students of the respective colleges would be allowed to set-up startups. 5.2. The Department of IT will facilitate participation of Micro & Small Enterprises IT units in tender/ RFP issued for procurement ofIT goods / services (Procurement valued of INR 5 crores or more). This will be done by inserting a clause in the tender documents/RFP documents those bidders who include MSMES in project delivery (through allotment of a minimum of 10% percentage of contract value of the project to the MSMES), shall be given additional weightage (of atleast 6% of the total score) at the time of technical evaluation of bids. This provision is in consonance with Model RFP template for Implementation Agencies issued by DeitY, Ministry of Communications & IT, Government of India. 6. Information Security 6.1. Formulating Chandigarh Information Security Policy to promote public trust in Government, with continual improvements to protect the city from large scale cyber- attacks and cyber-disruptions, thus enhancing preparedness, security and resilience. 6.2. Enabling actions shall be taken for compliance with National Cyber Security Policy 2013. Page 9 of 12 

Information Technology & Electronics Policy, Chandigarh, 2013 6.3. A culture of information security shall be created for inculcating responsible user behaviors and actions including building capacities and awareness campaigns. 7. To focus on promotion of Electronics System Design and Manufacturing 7.1. Chandigarh Institute of Electronics System Design and Manufacturing will be set up to realize the growth potential of Electronics System Design and Manufacturing industry. 7.2. Enabling actions shall be taken for compliance with National Policy on Electronics 2011. 7.3. R&D in electronics system design and manufacturing shall be promoted to foster innovation in design, development, testing and calibration, in technologies like nano- technologies, automotive electronics, avionics, industrial electronics, medical electronics, LEDs, Solar Photvoltaics, Information and Broadcasting etc. 7.4. Electronic Technology Transfer, IPR etc will be incentivized through friendly tax regime for industries who adopt technologies developed by Indian institutes/organizationslaboratories. 7.5. The Department of IT would work towards notifying Chandigarh as Brownfield Electronic Manufacturing Cluster. 7.6. To create awareness amongst consumers about standards and against sub-standard and spurious electronic products. 8. Other provisions 8.1. An inter-departmental Implementation Committee shall be formed for implementation of the IT Policy. 8.2. A High Powered Committee shall be formed SO as to monitor the progress of implementation of the IT Policy. This Committee will meet at least once in a quarter. It will consist ofthe following: a. Adviser to the Administrator - Chairman b. Secretary Information Technology C. Secretary Education d. Secretary Industries e. Deputy Commissioner f. Director Information Techmology-cum-CEo, SPIC g. State Informatics Officer, NIC The Committee shall, inter-alia, review: a. The progress in IT initiatives. b. Improvements in the IT infrastructure. C. Discuss latest trends / technologies in the IT. Page 10 of 12 

Information Technology & Electronics Policy, Chandigarh, 2013 d. Exports, generation of employment and other statistics relating to the IT industry. e. Changes required in policy to ensure better achievement of objectives of the IT policy. f. Improvements and trends in IT Education. g. Roadmaps to give effect to the IT policy. Page 11 of 12 

Information Technology & Electronics Policy, Chandigarh, 2013 IV. DEFINITIONS 1. IT-ITES industry includes producers of IT Hardware and Software. 2. IT Hardware industry includes manufacturers of desktops, laptops, servers, printers, computer storage devices, networking equipment and peripherals like keyboards, mouse etc. 3. Software includes written programs or procedures or rules and associated documentation pertaining to the operation of a computer system and that are stored in read/write memory 4. R&D in Electronics System Design includes Design, testing, calibration & product development in electronics systems in automotive, semiconductor, energy & utilities, chip design, wafer fabs etc. 5. e-governance is defined as the application of electronic means in (1) the interaction between government and citizens, as well as (2) in internal government operations to simplify and improve democratic aspects of Governance. Page 12 of 12 

