ITES Policy Chandigarh's Vision for ITES... To accelerate the Economic growth of Chandigarh by leveraging the potential for IT and ITES in the city, and creating a competitive knowledge base for sustaining the growth of the industry. Introduction Making Chandigarh a preferred location for the ITES companies. Policy designed to facilitate and enhance the growth of the sector. Objectives To make Chandigarh a major center for IT Enabled services, by attracting a substantially large share of the ITES industry in India. To develop the infrastructure vital to the sustenance of the sector in the Union Territory. To attract Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) into Chandigarh in the knowledge industry for creating sustainable growth in the local economy. To enrich the skill sets of the youth of the Union Territory to provide them with high level employment and to enable high quality delivery of ITES. ITI Enabled Services Customer interaction services (including Call Centers). Back office operations/revenue accounting / data entry/data conversion (including finance and accounting/HR services Payroll and Insurance Claim processing Business Process Outsourcing. Transcription/ translation services. Geographic Information Systems (GIS) content development animation lengineering and design. 

Other services including remote education, data search, market research and network consultancy and management, Web development and hosting services. Broad Initiatives The major nitiatives to be taken by the Administration relate to the following areas, which have a vital impact on the ITES sector. Education Infrastructure Policy Incentive Education To ensure a ready availability of trained manpower = Training the youth of Chandigarh in the use of computers and in the use of spoken English right from the primary school level. At least 30% of school graduating population would have adequate soft- skills to support the ITES industry as manpower by 2006. Training centers for skill-sets specific to the ITES sector like accent training, basic computer and Internet training and customer handling skills. ITES training companies would be eligible for similar facilities as those applicable for the ITES companies. ITES industry to be proactively involved in the design of the course curriculum for training centers. alnfrastructure Augmenting the existing, well-developed Telecommunication and Power infrastructure in the Union Territory. 

Agreements signed with leading long distance telecom service providers to establish nodes for providing high-speed connectivity in the Chandigarh Technology Park (CTP) and other designated ITES facilities and parks Very positive assessment of Chandigarh by Gartner in their survey on the Business Process Outsourcing sector in India. All key service providers including VSNL and STPI are being allotted space at the Chandigarh Technology Park. Exemption for the Chandigarh Technology Park and other designated ITES parks and facilities from statutory power cuts. Commercial Office space (Ready Built space) of international quality would also be developed to house ITES companies in the Chandigarh Technology Park. An estimated 600,000 feet would be made available by 2004-2005 for leasing and purchase by ITES companies. Policy Incentives The following initiatives would be undertaken to create a favourable regulatory environment for ITES companies A. ITES companies to employ women and persons in the age group of 18 and 21 during night shifts provided the requisite security and transport facilities are provided to them by the Companies B. The companies would also be allowed to operate for 24 hours a day and 365 days an year. C. A Single Window interface for all necessary clearances would be set up. The following departments/ofices would be part of the Single Window interface. 1. The Office of the Finance ecretary-Chandigarn Administration 2. . The Department of IT 3. The Engineering Department including the Electricity Department 

4. Department of Labour 5. - Urban Planning and Architecture D. The ITES sector would be exempted from the Chandigarh Pollution Control Act except in relation to power generation sets. Self certification under different labour laws and legislation shall be made applicable to the ITES companies, as per norms formulated by the Department of Labour. 

