Suvimonmenta / 4 DN S SMR OLIGY CHANDEGABH: 2015 DEPARTMENT OFINDUSTRIES CHANDIGARH - ADMINISTRATION  3 

PROF. KAPTAN SINGH SOLANKI Govemor of Haryana, Govemnor of Punjab and Administrator Union Territory, Chandigarh MESSAGE Itgives me immense pleasure in launching the firstever Industrial Policy ofUnion Territory, Chandigarh. Chandigarh has, from the start, been a city of international standards, one which has maintained its high quality of ecosystem over the decades. With the launching of Industrial Policy for the first time in U.T. Single Window System has been introduced sO as to enhance the ease of businessmen. Itis also gratifying that the. Administration has made an effort to provide clearances required by the entrepreneurs while setting up of new enterprise in a prescribed time bound manner. Further, review at periodic intervals would ensure effective implementation ofthis policy. I am confident that the Industrial Policy would succeed in attracting Hi-tec and knowledge based industry in U.T, Chandigarh. 1 would also urge upon the officers of the Industries and the concerned Departments to ensure that the Industrial Policy is implemented in a right perspective and ini time. 87 (Prof. Kaptan Singh Solanki) 

VIJAY DEV, IAS Adviser to the Administrator U.T., Chandigarh MESSAGE congratulate the entrepreneurs of Union Territory, Chandigarh that their awaited wish of an Industrial Policy for U.T. Chandigarh has been fulfilled and the Chandigarh Administration has come out with an Industrial Policy. I also congratulate the Secretary Industries and his team fori their earnest efforts in bringing out this Policy. The Industrial Policy would be reviewed at periodic intervals by the Administration. It would be ensured by all departments concerned to implement the actions enshrined in the Industrial Policy in a time bound manner. LAwey (Vijay Dev) 

ANURAG AGARWAL, IAS Home Secretary Chandigarh Administration MESSAGE It gives me immense pleasure to see that finally first ever industrial policy of Chandigarh is being released. Although in the past, there have been policies on estate management procedures regarding industrial plols, however, there was no comprehensive industrial policy to look at the issues ranging from infrastructure development to facilitation of existing industries as well as new industries and also the broad components of estate management procedures. The relevance of this industrial policy increases furtherin the light of impetus given by the Government of India to industrialization through various schemes including flagship programme of'Makei in India'. Our endeavor is to ensure that even with the constraint of limited availabilily of land, the industrial activity in Chandigarh is revitalized with focus on IT enabled, knowledge based and high-tech industries while also encouraging the conventional strong hold of industry in Chandigarh i.e. automobile parts, fasteners and bathroom fittings. This Industrial Policy has been prepared after a number of deliberations with various industrial associations as well as stakeholder departments. Icongratulate the Industries Departmentfort the hard work that has been put in by them for preparing this Industrial Policy. I hope that this first Industrial Policy of Chandigarh will go a long way in meeting the genuine aspirations of industrialists and revitalizing the industrial areas of Chandigarh. (Anurag Agarwal, IAS) 

Chandigarh Administration INDUSTRIAL POLICY-2015 Table of Contents Chapter Subject Pages Table of Contents Preamble 1 Salient features 1 Current status 2 Need for irdustrial policy 3 Objectives 3 1 THRUST ENTERPRISES 4 2 EASE OF DOING BUSINESS 5 2.1 Common Application Form 5-6 2.2 Strengthening the Single Window System o 2.3 Self- Certification Scheme 7 2.4 Online issuance of VAT forms 7 3 MICRO,SMALL & MEDIUM ENTERPRISES (MSME) 8 3.1 Online Issuance of E.M. I & II 8 3.2 Micro & Small Enterprises Facilitation Council 8 3.3 Industrial Development cum-Facility Centre 9 3.4 Procurement Preference Policy - 3.5 Industrial Advisory Committee 9 3.6 Certre of Excelience 9 4 BUSINESS PROMOTION 10 4.1 Marketing Assistance 10 4.2 Single Window Committee 10 4.3 Visit of Industrialist to other stale/ abroad 10 5 ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES IN THE INDUSTRIAL AREA 11 5.1 IT / Elcctronics Hardware, IT / Software / ITES Units ctc. 11-13 5.2 Industrial Warchousing 14 5.3 Automobile Service Stations 14 6 EASE OF TRANSFER OF PROPERTY 15 6.1 Transfer of Industrial plots from lease hold to free hold 15 6.2 Transfer of Ind. plots from Lease hold to Lease hold basis 15 6.3 Allotment of vacant plots. 15 7 INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT AS DRIVER OF INVESTMENT 16 PROMOTION 8 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND BIOTECH TO BE THE KEY DRIVER OF 17 GROWTH 8.1 Entrepreneurship Development Centre 17 8.2 Benefits 17-18 

PREAMBLE Chandigarh is a small Union Territory covering an area of 114 Sq. Kms. only. It has two aiready developed Industrial Areas and very little additional land is available for large scale industrialization. In the light of above, the Industrial Policy has to address itself to promote inveslment, development of knowledge based industries ard to rejuvenale and re- strengthen the existing enterprises particularly the micro, small and medium scale sector The goals set forth in the document would create environment friendly Micro Small & Medium Enterprises and would promoto Chandigarh as a hub of environment friendly, hi-tech and knowledge based economic activities. Taking into account the current economic scenario and prospective developments, the Policy would also lay particular emphasis on further strengthening the basc of the manufacturing sector. The Policy also provides for creating an enabling environment which promotes ease of doing business and it aims at revitalising the industrial area. SALIENT FEATURES Policy shift is essential to change industrial profile from low skilled industries to high-skilled industries. The policy asserts the following strategy: Infrastructure Development Supporl skill development & other promotional measures like allowing Knowledge Based Industries in Industrial area among others. Banning entry of polluting industries. To provide common facilities such as tool room facility / center of excellence to the small scale entreprencurs. Removal of grievances of entrepreneurs through Single Window Committee. Industry consultation in decision making and sustainability. Facilitation to MSES in getting interest on their delayed payments through Micro Smali Enterprises Facilitation Council. Administration's role will be to provide good infrastructure, investor friendly environment with a responsive feedback and consultation mechanism and by allcwing new activitics in Industrial Area. 1 

CURRENT STATUS The Union Territory of Chandigarh has a total area of 114 sq. kms. with a tolal population of 10.53 lac as per last census 2011. The Administration has taken a number of major initiatives to upgrade the infrastructure in Chandigarh, Lo boost economic growth in the region. The industrial sector plays a vital role in the economic development. With the changing global and domestic environment, this first industrial policy has been framed with the aim of promoting industrial growth in the context of overall economic development of the Union Territory by creating an investor friendly enabling environment. Chandigarh Administration earmarked 1475 acres of land for Industrial Area, Phase-I & II which came into existence during the year 1970. The Administration has also planned Industrial Area, Phase-IIl in Mauli Jagran for which an area of 152 acres of land has been earmarked. Before the introduction of MSMED Act, there were 4 units in large and Medium Seclor and 2074 units in small scale sector registered upto March, 2007. Thereafter under the Micro, Small &. Medium Enterprises Act, 2006, Entrepreneur's Memorandum-ll has been issued to 1380 Nos. a EM-I has been issued to 410 No. enterprises upto 2014-15. 2 

NEED FOR INDUSTRIAL POLICY The Chandigarh Administration had earlier notified a policy for Allotment of Plots/Sheds in the Union Territory of Chandigarh in the year 1990 which was subsequently repealed and replaced in the year 2000 and thereafter it was slightly amended in the year 2006. The Chandigarh Administration also tormulated a scheme namely "Chandigarh Conversion of land use of Industrial site into commercial activties/services in Industrial Arca, Phase-l & II Chandigarh Scheme 2005" which allowed commercial activities in Industrial Area Phase- & II after payment of conversion charges. With the tremendous progress in the field of Computer Science and IT and other Knowledge based industry, a number of avenues have been opened for the setting up of enterprises by the budding entrepreneurs. A new Industrial Policy which recognizes the dynamic economic activities while accounting for the limitation of space in UT Chandigarh is hence and urgent necd. OBJECTIVES: 1. To maximize procuction and achieve higher productivity through modern and efficient work techniques and optimum utilization of available resources. 2. To promote non polluting and export oriented industries. 3. To encourage activities allied to industry, such as training for up- grading skills of man poweriworkers through Vocational Training Programmes & entrepreneurial development programmes and generate employment and entrepreneurial opportunities across all sectors of thc cconomy, 4. To create industry friendly environment by simplifying rules and procedures. 5. To integrate and provide single window and provide facilitation support. 6. To allow TATES services in Industrial Area. 7. Cluster Dcvclopment approach. 8. To solve the genuine concerns of entrepreneurs. 3 

CHAPTER- 1. THRUST ENTERPRISES The Chandigarh Administration would promote environmental friendly, energy efficient, hi-tech, high value added industries. The following would bc the thrust entorpriscs:- 1.1 Electronics ilerns. 1.2 IT/ITES/ Bio Technology: Nano Technology 1.3 Light Engineering goods. 1.4 Knowledge based industries. 1.5 Automotive Components. 1.6 Handloom and handicrafts. 1.7 Furnilure items. 1.8 Santary fittings. 1.9 Industrial fastencrs and allied industries. 1.10 Hi-tech and non-polluting industries. 1.11 R&D oriented services. 4 

CHAPTER- Il EASE OF DOING BUSINESS. The aim of Administration would be to simplify the investment process through various procedural simplfications. The emphasis would be on Government being a facilitator and providing handholding assistance to the upcoming enterprises. 2.1 COMMON APPLICATION FORM. Common Application Form (CAF) is the simplest way of reducing paperwork, as many of the applications requirc similar information to be provided by a company. A CAF compatible with electronic platform will be developed and it would be the cndeavour of the administration tc make it functional by 2nt October 2015. The CAF could include following clearances and all these services would be provided in a time bound manner. Sr. Name of the Service Concerned Department Time Limit No. Working Days 1. Water Connection. Public, Health (Municipal 15 days Sewer connection Corporation) 2. Acknowledgement under Industries Department MSMEDI Acl 2006. 24 hrs For EM-I 7 days For EM-II 3. Consent to Establish/ Operate/ Chandigarh Pollution 301 120 Renewal under Environment Control Committee days Laws. 4. Power Connection. Engineering Department 30 days New load/ additional load 5. Building Plan Approval. Estate Office 32 days 6. New Registration/ renewal of Labour Deparlment 15 days icense under Factories Act 7. CSTA TIN Number Excise & Taxation 30 days Department For setting up of new enterprise, the entrepreneur would apply on a common application form through the portal of Chandigarh Administration, Fee, if any for registration/ renewal would be paid by the entrepreneurs either online or in cash for which a provision would be made in single window cell and officials will be 5 

deputed to receive the fee and also to facilitate the entreprenours in this regard. All the above mentioned services would be provided/ cleared in the prescribed time limit and if any department does not provide the services within the above said time limit despite the application having no deficiency, the service would be deemed to have been approved. 2.2 STRENGTHENING THE SINGLE WINDOW SYSTEM: The investors shall be facilitated to file all applications related to project at one pointi Online. A special cell for the purpose of providing singlc window services would be set up in the office of Director Industries to act as a nodal office and the other departments which are necessary with respect to providing services as mentioned above would be involved and besides online, physical forms for providing these services would be kept in this cell. Details of procedures and formats for various approvals will be placed on website for easy reference of investors. A time bound schedule for clearance of investor applications will bc decided and all government agencies will work in coordination to ensure expeditious movement of applications. The Cell will become a repository of information regarding state infrastructure, information about investment application processes and issues being raised across the industry. Additionally, this cell will also feed into a platform for information dissemination and will provide additional information related to orders, rules & regulations. Coordination with the relevant departments and required updates will be provided to the investors through this System. A monitoring cell will be constituted under the Chairmanship of Deputy Commissioner which will periodically review the status of pending applications with Single Window System and with the concerned departments. 6 

2.3 SELF CERTIFICATION SCHEMEEXEMPTION FROM INSPECTION UNDER VARIOUS LABOUR LAWS. A Self Certification Scheme under Labour Law is proposed lo be introduced which may cover the followings- i) The Payment of Wages Act, 1936 ii) The Minimum Wages Act, 1948 ii) The Factories Act, 1948 iv) The Employment Exchanges Act, 1959 V) The Employment Exchange (Notification of Vacancies Act), 1961 vi) The Punjab Shops and Commercial Establishment, 1958 vii) The Contract Labour (Regulation & Abolition) Act, 1970 2.4 ONLINE ISSUANCE OF VAT FORM. The work on issuance of val form online has been taken up and VAT forms will be issued online w.e. f 15!n August, 2015 7 

CHAPTER- III MICRO, SMALL & MEDIUM ENTERPRISES (MSME) SECTOR The Micro, Smail & Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 provides for promotion, development and enhancing the competitiveness of micro, small and medium enterprises and the matters connected therewith or incidental therelo. Accordingly with tho introduction of MSMED Act, 2006, the Chandigarh Administration has already taken up following steps to facilitate the MSMES in Chandigarh. 3.1 ONLINE ISSUANCE OF ENTREPRENEURSHP MEMORANDUM - 1& II The online ssuance of Entrepreneurship Memorandum- & II has already been started in Union Territory, Chandigarh w.e.f 01.10.2014 and that too in a time bound manner i.e. 24 hours and 7 days respectively as per directions of the Govt. of India, Ministry of Micro small & Medium Enterprises. The UT Chandigarh is the first amongst all the Union Territories to start online filling of EM-I & EM-II. 3.2 MICRO & SMALL ENTERPRISES FACILITATION COUNCIL The Chandigarh Administration has constituted a Micro & Small Enterprises Facilitation Council under Delayed Payments Act vide notification No. 4/1/76- HI(3-2008/18140, dated 1709200870.052017 consisting of the following members under the Chairmanship of Director Industries:- Lead District Manager, Punjab National Bank, Chandigarh. Standing Counsel of Chandigarh Administration. President, Industries Association of Chandigarh. President, Chamber of Chandigarh Industries. The Chandigarh Administration has published the Chandigarh Micro & Small Enterprises Facilitation Council Rules vide Notification No. 4/176-Part-l-H3)- 2012/12605, dated 25!h June, 2012 and the MSEFC has started functioning in UT., Chandigarh. The meeting of the Council is held on 2d Thursday of every month. 8 

3.3 INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT-CUM-FACILITY CENTRE:- For the development of industry, an industrial DevebopmentcumFacity Centre has been set up which provides support facilitics to SSI Units which could not afford the same at their own. This centre is providing common facilities to the small scale entrepreneurs such as precision tool room facility, heat trcatment facility etc. Its focus is to provide facilities to the Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises in the area to get various jobs done at the reasonable rates. The nature of jobs is prodominantly of 'tool room' type with low batch quantitics and precision. It will be the endeavour of the Administration to upgrade the existing IDFC in keeping with demand and the change of the technology, as required from time to time. 3.4 PROCUREMENT PREFERENCES POLICY:- The Chandigarh Administralion shall implement the Procurement Prefcrence Policy in U.T. Chandigarh to facilitate the MSMES. 3.5 INDUSTRIAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE: An industrial advisory committee would be constituted by the administration under the Chairmanship of Adviser to the Administrator with officers of the other departments and represcntative of the Industrial Associations to sort-out the important issues relating to Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises of U.T., Chandigarh. : 3.6 CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE: A centre of excellence will be setup by the Administration especially for fasteners/ nut screws/ tractor parts and bath fittings enterprises. In addition, for promotion/up gradation of these industries, exhibitions/ fairs would also be organised. 9 

CHAPTER- IV BUSINESS PROMOTION 4.1 MARKETING ASSISTANCE:- To help the Local MSMES to showcase the products manufaclured by these enterprises, the Chandigarh Administration helps participation of MSMES in the India Intemational Trade Fair at New Delhi which is organized by the India Trade Promotion Organization, New Delhi from 14-27 November every year. The Department also organizes its own exhibition namely CHANDIKRIT at Chandigarh every year. 4.2 SINGLE WINDOW COMMITTE:- A Single Window Committee has been setup under the Chairmanship of Director Industries with officers of the other departments as its members to remove the day-today gricvances of the local enterprises. 4.3 VISIT OF INDUSTRIALISTS TO THE OTHER STATES/ABROAD. Tours of the entrepreneurs would be arranged to acquaint them with the technology adopted by the entrepreneurs of other States/in foreign countries sO as to promote the business and enhance the manulacturing skills in UT Chandigarh. 10 

CHAPTER. V ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES IN THE INDUSTRIAL AREA It is the consistent demand of the various industrial associations to allow more activities in industrial Areas. The Administration is keen lo preserve the nature of the Industrial Area and also willing to rejuvenate the Industrial Arca with new activities in commensurate with the time and technology, the following additional activities will be allowed. 5.1 IT / Electronics Hardware, IT / Software / ITES Units etc. The following IT/ Electronics/ Software/ Hardware, ITES Units and technology & Rescarch units will be allowed:- IT/Electronics' Other Communication /Communication Technology Hardware ITES Units Research and Software Units Units Development Units Computing devices including: Acplication Soitware Back-Olfice Technology Desktop Personal Computor Operating system Opcrations Research Servers anc System software Business and Development Work- staticns Middlovarci Process Units in the aroas Teminals Fimmware Outscurcing of: Laptos Computers, Note Telecommunicaticns including Call Bio Technology, Book and Mobile Centres Geretic Computars Tablet PCs and Communicatons Digital Content Cell Eng neering, Culture Netbooks softwa'e Development Animation! Microbiology, Palm top Computers A PDA Design and quality Audic Bu-nformalics, Peripheral Interface assurarce work for Visual effects / Robolivs, controllers/ these scitware Gamirg Nano Techrology, Memory modules including: System ntegration Produclion Gene.vs, Memory modules (eg., work! components for studios for TV & Clinica scftware Flms etc. Triais and SIMM, Sottware (provided Drug Devclopment DIMM) Manlenance, remotely) Netwerk Interface Controllers Enhancemerts, Data Processing Disk drive controllers (e.g. DEEIDEATNSATASCSI Localization and Data and other ceripherai interface elated services conversicn, conirollers Software System data mining, Storage Unils including: Quality and Securiry digitization, data Hard Disk Drivos Auditirg and entry, warchous data RAID Devices & their Gerification Services Packaged ng Controllers LSLSIPGRASIC software Floppy Disk Drives and System-On-Chip suppert services C.D. ROM Drives Dasign Services (provided romotoly, Tape Drives - DLT Drives! Special purpose Website DAT saftware desiçn, Services, Optical Disk Drives develop ment and web designing Other Digital Storage Devices testing including and inciud ng flash memory SCADA. GPIB for web content cevices Procass monitoring development and Control services 11 

such as USB Pen Drives IT Solution Others providers Key Board (including scrver Monitor data hanks, Mouse apclication service Mulli modia dovicos such as providers, cameras, projectors, audio internetweo anc hased video units e-commerce SmatCarris and related servicc Readers, writers ard pr nters providers, Digilal Tablets system Printers, Scanners and rclated integration devices including: service Dol matrix prowiders) Laserjet IT Sysem Audit Inkjet Services Deskjet Engneering and LED Printers Desigring Line Printers (CADICAM etc.) Plotiers Geographic Flat Bed, hanc-held and other Informalion document scarners and System document cameras. Services Human Pass-book Printers Resource Multi-Function Dovices including phctocepiers Services Clhor spocial purpose iprovided printers remotely) Nctworking products Insurance Claim including: Processrg Hubs (provided Roulers remotely, Switches Medical & Logal Wircloss Notworking Transcription equipmen: Payroll Firewalls and Unified Threat processing Management devices, Finance B Intrudcr detection and/or prevent lon Revenue devices Accounting Trans receivers (provided Other wired and wireless rerotely) nelworking / nework security Remotslon-line equipment Education Power supplies to I Security and Computer Risk Systoms including: Management Switch mode power supplies scrviccs Un nterrupted Power supplies (provided I aptop / Mobile phone power remotely) adaptors and Chargers Data Ccntor and Networking 1 Cabling & Disaster related Recovery accessories (related to IT Center Services Industry) including Data Communication Cablcs Notork incuding Fibre Optic and Operations Copper Cable Centers Connectors, Terminal Blocks Olhor serviccs Jack panels, patch cord provided with Mounting cord /wiring blocks the Surface mount boxes usu of IT Consumables including: infrastructure CD ROM/ DVD ROM including Ficppy Disk 12 

Cther Optical and Vagnetic information slorage media services, tele- Tapes DAT / DLT medicines Ribbons Toners services, Inkjet Cartridges rempte access Inks for Output devices cyper services, Electronic Components: rempte Printed. Circuit Board/ diagnostic populated PCB and repair Megnetic heads, Print heads services Connectors etc. Microphones/ Speakers Fuses LSI and MSI devices Telecommunication Equipment including: Telephones, inclucing IP Phones and Videophonos Facsimile Machines' Fax careds Tele Printers/ Telex machiner PABSWIFPABXRAXMAXK Telophonc Exchange Multiplexers! Muxes Moders Telephonc answoring machiners Telecemmunication Switching Equipment Anterna & Mast Wireless datacom equipment Receiv ng equipments like Pagers, Mobile, Cellular Phones. etc. VSATS Video Conferencing Equipments Including Set Top Boxes for bath Vidco and Digital Signalfing. Other Equipment Automated Teller Machiners Finger Print, IRIS and other biometric scanners Touchscroon tominals and Kiosks CCTV cameras These additional activities will be allowed with a caveat that in case of any ambiguity, any activity entailing direct customer interface will not be allowed such as commercial activities viz, offices, shops, point of sales, hotcls, hospitals, show- rooms, educational institutions/universily as were allowed by the Administration under the Conversion Policy-2005. 13 

5.2 INDUSTRIAL WAREHOUSING To mect the increasing warehousing demand of city, only industrial warehousing will be allowed in industrial area Phase-I and industrial area Phase-Il. 5.3 AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS The number of vehicles in Chandigarh is increasing day by day. Vehicles need regular service / repair for maintaining road worthiness / fitness. Therefore Automobile service stations will be allowed in industrial area Phase-I and Phase-II. However, additional FAR will not be permitted. Parking requirement etc. will be governed by the extant Bye laws. With this, the traffic flows where ever possible could be made one way to double their effective capacity. In case of any activity which is not specified in the above list, the case for registration would be referred to higher authorities through Secretary Industries to take appropriate decision. 14 

CHAPTER- VI EASE OF TRANSFER OF PROPERTY There is a persistent demand of the industry associations to convert industrial plots allotted on lease hold basis lo free hold basis to facilitate transfer of plots from lease hold basis to lease hold basis and allotment of vacant plots in Industrial Area Phase-l and Industrial Phase-ll. 6.1 TRANSFER OF INDUSTRIAL PLOTS FROM LEASE HOLD TO FREE HOLD BASIS As regard the demand cf industry associations to convert industrial plots allotted on lease hold basis to free hold basis is concerned, the matter is under active consideration of the Administration / Ministry of Home Affairs. 6.2 TRANSFER OF INDUSTRIAL PLOTS FROM LEASE HOLD TO LEASE HOLD BASIS Transfer of Industrial plots on the basis of lease hold to lease hold basis will be facilitated. Administration will develop suitable mechanism for it. 6.3 ALLOTMENT OF VACANT PLOTS. The number of vacantiresumed industrial olots/sheds in Industrial Area, Phasc-I & II is approximately 150 and in IT Park also some plots are available for allotment. These plots will be allotted in accordance with the policy framed by the Chandigarh Administration from 15th Aug, 2015 onwards. 15 

CHAPTER- VII NFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT AS DRIVER OF INVESTMENT PROMOTION. The UT Administration recognizes that infrastructure is the key for economic development. The Chandigarh Administration has set up Industrial Area, Phase-I and Phase-Il. Both these phases are fully developed, In order to facilitate the growth of industries especially the MSME sector, the administration has planned massive ugradation of civic infrastructure in Industrial Area, phase-I and phase-II. The Administration has planned to provide adequate parking space in Industrial Area. All the roads in industrial Area would be re-carpeted/ rehabilitatcd wherever necessary. Widening of roads will be done where additional width is available. The encroachment in Industrial Areas will be removed. The street lights/ road side lights would be repaired within a six months time. 24x7 power supply would be ensured w.e.f. 1St July, 2015. The water supply in industrial Areas would be erisured from 9:00 AM to 6:00 PM regularly. It would be the effort cf the Administration to beautify the Industrial Areas for which parks/ green belt would be developed. Existing fountains would also be made functional. The inter connectivity between Industrial Area, Phase-I and II will be examined. It will be the endeavour of the Administration to cxccute various development works in a time-bound manner. sO that the industrialists find the best of infrastructure for the growth of industry in the Industrial Areas. All the concerned departments will ensure proper maintenance and cleanliness for beautification of the Industrial Arcas. It would bc the endeavour of the Chandigarh Administration to provide quality and uninterrupted 24x7 power supply and to cater to increase in power load expeditiously after periodical assessment by the engineering wing. Also new power connections would be released for Industrial Units as per demand and viability within the specified time frame. Further Non conventional and Rencwable sources of energy would be encouraged. Automation, up-gradation and renovation of Distribution system in the vicinity of the area will be done regularly and DSM and energy efficiency plan will be implemented. 16 

CHAPTER - VIII INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND BIOTECH TO BE THE KEY DRIVER OF GROWTH. The Chandigarh Administration has set up IT Park (Phase I & Phase I) on an area of 351 acres. It would be ensured to preserve the existing cco-sensitive nature of the arca. Due to proactive policy of the Administration, exports to the tune of Rs. 1850 crores with a manpower deployment of 20,000 persons has already been achieved in IT Park, Phase I & II and 70 Hi-tech companics like IBM, Infosys, Tech Mahindra have already sel their ventures in the IT Park. The Administration has also set up an Entrepreneur Development Contre in the IT Park to provide incubation facilities lo the new entrepreneurs. 6.1 ENTREPRENEUR DEVELOPMENT CENTRE The Entrepreneur Development Centre (EDC) envisaged by the Department of IT, Chandigarh Administration is an important step towards the promotion and support to entrepreneurship. The EDC has been built on an approximate area of 1.6 acres (70,000 sq. ft) with Rs. 18.71 crores approved project cost. AIMS & OBJECTIVES: The primary aim of EDC is to fuel embryonic business ideas and awaken the spirit of entrepreneurship in the youth. EDC is expected lead to boost software exports from Chandigarh by cncouraging Young Entrepreneurs and Small and Medium Enterprises in selling up entreproneurships. EDG has been planned as a transit point for budding T companics that are willing to come to the IT Park but do not have space of their own. 6.2 BENEFITS There has never been a better time to enter a business plan competiticn. While the financial inducement for any, competition is undoubtedly an attractive element for cash-pressed entrepreneurs, it is of secondary importance when one considers the other real benefits rosulting from participating in a competition. 1. Tap into increased support for cntrepreneurs 17 

2. Obtain critical independent analysis of your business plan 3. Gain access to mentors and networking opportunities 4. Improve key transferable skills 5. Enhance your understanding of what investors want Further IT would be the major focus area in the IT Park as well as Industrial Area, Phase-l, and Phase-lI. For that software as well as hardware will be permissible in the Industrial Area, Phase-I and Phase-Il also and for that change of project will be permissible. 18 

